The Project Gutenberg eBook of You can't win, by Jack Black

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: You can't win

Author: Jack Black

Contributor: Robert Herrick

Release Date: November 21, 2022 [eBook #69404]

Language: English

Produced by: Joshua Lund (This file was produced from images generously
             made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU CAN'T WIN ***

YOU CAN’T WIN




            You Can’t Win
                 BY
             JACK BLACK

          With a foreword by
            ROBERT HERRICK

               New York
         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                1926
         *All rights reserved*




            Copyright 1925,
            By Jack Black.

            Copyright 1926,
       By The Macmillan Company.
                 ---
         Set up and electrotyped.
        Published September, 1926.

         Reprinted October, 1926.
        Reprinted December, 1926.

  Printed in the United States of America
         By The Cornwall Press




ACKNOWLEDGMENT


This book is dedicated to Fremont Older, to Judge Frank H. Dunne, to the
unnamed friend who sawed me out of the San Francisco jail and to that
dirty, drunken, disreputable, crippled beggar, “Sticks” Sullivan, who
picked the buckshot out of my back—under the bridge—at Baraboo,
Wisconsin.

                                The Author.




FOREWORD


The revelations of a thief or of a prostitute are rightfully suspected
by the normal citizen of having been dressed for publicity, either
sensational or sentimental or both. An unstable emotionalism in the
subject, perhaps psychopathic, induces a melodramatic and unreal
treatment of past experience. The tale is told not as it happened but
rather as the subject likes, in reverie, to think it happened or as he
believes the reader would like to have had it happen. There is nothing
of that sort in Jack Black’s story of his life as a professional thief.
The honesty of the “confession” is self-evident. With a few lapses into
the conventional, the expected, he displays the rare literary power of
letting the facts speak for themselves, without any window-dressing,
either lachrymose or hilarious. He has an instinct for realities.

Indeed it is that mental grip, enabling him to perceive and apply
realities, that obviously brought him out in the end so that he could
break the shackles of his criminal habits and reinstate himself
completely in accord with society. It was almost purely a mental feat.
At the end, to be sure, he dwells upon the helpfulness of kind friends,
especially of Mr. Older, of the “square deal” he got from Judge Dunne,
and recognizes fully the impulse of gratitude to a friend who helped him
escape from prison by “cutting out the hop”—the hardest single bond he
had to break.  Those were emotional responses. But if it had not been
for his own good mind which he had slowly disciplined by reason, that
resolve “to go straight” would have been but another feeble human
aspiration for amendment with which the human hell is paved. The chief
interest I find in Black’s rapid survey of his life as a thief is this
progress of mental awakening and a corresponding growth of character
as a man, without which all the help of kind and enlightened friends
would have availed naught. It is what Black did for himself, what he
was, that counted most.

Jack Black was an experimental psychologist: he discovered slowly and
painfully, as most do, the psychological character of himself and of the
world in which he was placed. Thus he explored the law of habit and the
purely mental quality of self-control long before he attempted to apply
his knowledge to his own case. Any habit, he maintains, apropos of the
opium habit, can be broken provided the victim *wants* sufficiently to
change, and he notes the power of substitution, welcoming even his
worries as distractions, mentally, from the obsession of opium.  His
emphasis on the necessity of a subjective desire for change is an
unerring diagnosis of self. He wanted another kind of life enough to
make it come true. That is the great distinction of Jack Black as
professional lawbreaker and person.

His case is so common in our restless, mobile civilization that it may
be called typical or standard.  An active, intelligent, likable boy with
no stable ties, he adventured on the open road, almost by accident, the
wide world tempting him on, took what he wanted, learned the habits and
the resources of vagrancy, of criminality, of vice. But he did not sink
to the dregs per formula. He went to the top of his society. Stirred by
emulation with the only companions he had—hoboes, thieves, gamblers,
yeggs—he distinguished himself not only by success in individual
exploits but by a superiority of character that would not break,
“snitch,” or play the other fellow’s game—and by loyalty to his mates.

Then came as he was emerging from youth the chance that landed him in a
well-run Canadian prison and fertilized the seed of intellectual
interest by giving him access to a good library. For the first time he
discovered consciously his own mind—the interest of it—and from this
period it is evident that the habit of reading, of thinking, gained on
him until with relentless logic his mind, thus freed and fed, convinced
him that his boy’s life of defiance and lawlessness was wrong. After he
was convinced, it took years to free himself from all the implications
of twenty years of crime. But once convinced, with a mind of that
quality, the result was inevitable. Strange irony that the mental life
so essential to Black’s salvation should have been further fostered by
the gift of a library which Abe Ruef gave to the prison where he and
Black happened to be fellow prisoners. Ruef had taken the money which he
bestowed in this form on his fellow criminals from the public of San
Francisco. Mr.  Fremont Older, as a powerful newspaper editor, was
largely responsible for putting Ruef into the prison (and later in
freeing him!) where Ruef was indirectly an instrument in freeing Jack
Black from his bonds.

There was an aspect of the Canadian-prison experience less commendable
than its order and its providing the prisoners with a good library,
its wholesome and on the whole human management so glaringly in
contrast with the American prisons pictured in this story—and that
was flogging. In these days of a return to medieval punishments
for criminals, advocated by many leading citizens, it is well to
realize how devastating to Black were his two experiences of brutal
force—flogging in Canada, the strait-jacket in Folsom. They made
him—and many others—inhuman wild beasts ready for murder or suicide.
They left Black not cowed, but mutinous, hating and hateful. The
experience was wholly bad and futile, except possibly as a test of his
own growing self-control. It does not need Jack Black’s corroborative
evidence to know that brutality does not pay, even when applied to the
dangerous and to the outcast. In spite of the talk about reviving the
whipping post, we know that the use of physical brutality—floggings,
strait-jackets, and third-degree methods—will disappear: they are
failures in getting results from human beings. It is only a crude
society, as ours still is largely, that would tolerate what goes on
often in our larger prisons, where the application of “justice” is left
to a class little removed from the criminals on whom they operate. To
maim and mutilate human beings, to terrify and brutalize them in order
to correct them, is so obviously foolish and wicked that it hardly
needs statement.

In some cases like Black’s the victim is not broken, but tempered and
hardened in will, in evil. And that brings me to the most depressing
fact in criminology that the present book illustrates: the criminal is
almost always of an inferior mentality. It is only a superior mentality
such as Black’s that can survive and ultimately win freedom. Probably
Jack Black would admit that among his wide acquaintance in the criminal
class only a few, a very few, had the mental quality, the character, to
break their chains. The mass were condemned to remain criminals because
of defective mentality. That suggests inevitably the confused subject of
eugenics and birth control, in society’s relation to the criminal class,
which it so much fears and detests, but before which it so often seems,
as at the present moment, hopeless, like an ignorant, half well-meaning
parent angry over a troublesome child whose troublesomeness is in large
part the fruit of the parent’s own defective character. Many of these
aberrant specimens might be deflected from crime by feeding their minds.
Few ever can do it for themselves as Black almost wholly did it for
himself. Does modern life offer youth sufficient mental stimulus? The
motor car, the movie, bootleg liquor, and sex—these are the raw stimuli
with which youth tries to infuse some color and movement into the
tyrannous drabness of a standardized industrial life. In drawing his
moral at the end Black forgets, as the middle-aged are wont to forget,
the glamour and the lure of the “hangout” and the open road, which in
his boyhood seemed to be the only way out of a cheerless drudgery.
There are, of course, many other ways, which Black discovered later for
himself. And that is why I think his story is so well worth while
reading and pondering upon. Besides it is entertaining, because
unvarnished and unpretentious.

                  Robert Herrick.




YOU CAN’T WIN




CHAPTER I


I am now librarian of the *San Francisco Call*.

Do I look like one? I turn my chair so I can look in the mirror. I don’t
see the face of a librarian.  There is no smooth, high, white forehead.
I do not see the calm, placid, composed countenance of the student. The
forehead I see is high enough, but it is lined with furrows that look
like knife scars. There are two vertical furrows between my eyes that
make me appear to be wearing a continual scowl. My eyes are wide enough
apart and not small, but they are hard, cold, calculating. They are
blue, but of that shade of blue farthest removed from the violet.

My nose is not long, not sharp. Nevertheless it is an inquisitive nose.
My mouth is large—one corner of it is higher than the other and I appear
to be continually sneering. I do not scowl, I do not sneer; yet there is
something in my face that causes a man or woman to hesitate before
asking to be directed to Dr.  Gordon’s church. I can’t remember a time
that any woman, young or old, ever stopped me on the street and asked to
be directed. Once in a great while a drunk will roll over to where I am
standing and ask how he can get to “Tw’ninth ’n’ Mission.”

If I gaze into the mirror long enough and think hard enough I can
conjure up another face. The old one seems to dissolve and in its place
I see the face of a schoolboy—a bright, shining, innocent face. I see a
mop of white hair, a pair of blue eyes, and an inquisitive nose. I see
myself standing on the broad steps of the Sisters’ Convent School. At
the age of fourteen, after three years’ “board and tuition,” I am
leaving to go home to my father and then to another school for “big
boys.”

My teacher, a sweet, gentle Sister, a madonna, is holding my hand. She
is crying. I must hurry away or I will be crying, too. The Mother
Superior says good-by. Her thin lips are pressed so tightly together
that I can barely see the line where they meet. She is looking into my
eyes intently and I am wondering what she is going to say to me when the
crunching of gravel warns us that the old coach is ready and I must be
off. The Mother takes my teacher gently by the hand.  I see them go
through the wide door and disappear silently down the long, dark hall.

All the boys in the school, and there were fifty of them, lined up and
gave me a noisy send-off. The old coachman clucked to his horses, and I
was off for the train—and the world.

Any reader with a spoonful of imagination can picture me going home,
then to other schools in turn, then to some sort of an office job;
advancement here and there, always leading a well-ordered, quiet,
studious life, until he finally places me in the respectable and
responsible position of librarian of a metropolitan newspaper. That’s
the way it should have been, but wasn’t.

The course I followed from that convent school to this library desk, if
charted on a piece of paper, would look like the zigzag line that
statisticians use to denote the rise and fall of temperature or rainfall
or fluctuations of business. Every turn I made was a sharp one, a sudden
one. In years I cannot remember making one easy, graceful, rounded turn.

It has often been a question with me just how much the best of it a boy
has, who has his mother with him until his feet are well planted under
him; who has a home and its influences until he gathers some kind of a
working philosophy that helps him to face the world. There is no
substitute for the home and the mother.

It may not mean much to the average chap to have a friend say: “John, I
want you to meet my mother.” To me it means more than I can put on
paper. It seems to explain to me why the man who so proudly says, “This
is my mother,” is so many things that I am not and never can be. The
insurance people have not yet got to the stage of insuring a man against
a lifetime of failure, but if they ever do, I imagine the chap who can
guarantee them that he will keep his mother with him until he is twenty
will have a shade the best of it when he pays his premium.

I am not lugging in the fact that I was left motherless at the age of
ten to alibi myself away from anything. Nevertheless I think a fellow
has the right to ask himself if things might not have been different. My
mother died before I got very well acquainted with her—I doubt if any
child gives its parents much thought before the age of twelve or
thirteen.

I probably thought that my mother was a person put into the world to
scrub my face and neck and to be screamed and kicked at; to put
scratchy, flannel rags around my neck with smelly grease on them when I
had the croup; and to stand by the bed and keep me in it when I had the
measles. I can remember distinctly how angry I became when she brought
me a nice, new toothbrush and showed me what to do with it.

This was the greatest indignity of all—the last straw. I threw the thing
away and refused to use it; told her up and down that I was “no girl”
and wouldn’t have any “girl things.” She did not get angry and scold;
she just went on with her work, smiling.  She may have been pleased with
my manly outburst.  I don’t know.

I don’t remember that I was shocked or pained when she was buried. I
cried, because it was expected of me.  Mother’s relatives, a couple of
sisters, whom I never saw before or since, were crying. I saw tears in
my father’s eyes. So I tried to cry, and did. I know my father realized
what we had lost and his grief was genuine, but I could not feel it
then.

A few days later father sold our little cottage home and furnishings and
we moved into the only hotel in the little town. Schools were few and
far between for poor children then. I played around the hotel all day,
running wild, till father came home from work. He would have his dinner,
read a paper, and then put me to bed. After that he would read a book
for an hour and go to bed himself. We lived this way for almost a year.
Some nights he would put down his book and look at me strangely for
minutes at a time. I was a problem, undoubtedly, and he was trying to
decide what to do with me. A ten-year-old boy without a mother is a
fit problem for any father’s mind, and my father was a thoughtful man.

Looking back at it, it seems to me that I was blown here and there like
a dead leaf whipped about by the autumn winds till at last it finds
lodgment in some cozy fence corner. When I left school at fourteen I was
as unsophisticated as a boy could be. I knew no more of the world and
its strange way than the gentle, saintly woman who taught me my prayers
in the convent.

Before my twentieth birthday, I was in the dock of a criminal court, on
trial for burglary. I was acquitted, but that is another story. In six
years I had deserted my father and home, gone “on the road.” I had
become a snapper-up of small things, a tapper of tills, a street-door
sneak thief, a prowler of cheap lodging houses, and at last a promising
burglar in a small way.

At twenty-five I was an expert house burglar, a nighttime prowler,
carefully choosing only the best homes—homes of the wealthy, careless,
insured people.  I “made” them in the small hours of the night, always
under arms.

At thirty I was a respected member of the “yegg” brotherhood, a thief of
which little is known. He is silent, secretive, wary; forever traveling,
always a night “worker.” He shuns the bright lights, seldom straying far
from his kind, never coming to the surface. Circulating through space
with his always-ready automatic, the yegg rules the underworld of
criminals.  At forty I found myself a solitary, capable journeyman
highwayman; an escaped convict, a fugitive, with a background of
twenty-five years in the underworld.

A bleak background! Crowded with robberies, burglaries, and thefts too
numerous to recall. All manner of crimes against property. Arrests,
trials, acquittals, convictions, escapes. Penitentiaries! I see in the
background four of them. County jails, workhouses, city prisons, Mounted
Police barracks, dungeons, solitary confinement, bread and water,
hanging up, brutal floggings, and the murderous straitjacket.

I see hop joints, wine dumps, thieves’ resorts, and beggars’ hangouts.

Crime followed by swift retribution in one form or another.

I had very few glasses of wine as I traveled this route. I rarely saw a
woman smile and seldom heard a song.

In those twenty-five years I took all these things, and I am going to
write about them.

And I am going to write about them as I took them —with a smile.




CHAPTER II


I was a problem to my father, running loose about the hotel while he was
at work, and finally he took me to a Catholic school one hundred miles
away. On that short trip my father and I got to be good friends, and I
think I was closer to him that day than on any other of our lives.
Father left that evening and told me to be good, mind the Sisters, and
study hard.

I fell into my groove in the school with other boys of my age. Our days
were passed pleasantly with our small studies, many prayers, and daily
attendance at mass. The food was coarse but wholesome.

I never went home at vacation time. I spent those days in exploring
near-by orchards, gardens, and fields, picking up fruit, vegetables, and
berries, and other things that help to take the edge off a small boy’s
appetite.

I spent much time about the barns and stables with Thomas, the coachman.
I was an expert listener, a rare talent, inherited from my father, no
doubt.  Thomas was a ready talker. This is a combination that never
fails to make firm and lasting friendships, and we became friends. He
was a veteran of our Civil War, had been on the losing side, and came
out of it full of hatred, lead, and rheumatism. His heroes were not Lee
or Stonewall Jackson, but Quantrell, the guerrilla, Jesse and Frank
James, Cole and Bob Younger.

I never tired of listening to his war stories, and often found myself
piecing them together in the schoolroom when I should have been active
with my studies.

I believe I was the only boy at the school who never went away on
holidays and vacations to visit parents or relatives. The Sister
Superior, probably realizing that my life was a bit too drab, often gave
me the privilege of going to the village for mail and papers.  This was
a rare treat, and much sought by all the boys.  It meant a long walk, a
stroll down the village street, a chance to see people, maybe to buy a
fat sandwich, a bag of peanuts, or a bottle of pop—no small things in a
boy’s life. It also meant authority and responsibility, good things for
a boy. I looked forward to these journeys. I always had a little small
silver, for spending, from my father.

The time passed quickly and pleasantly enough.  I learned many prayers,
practiced for singing in the church choir, and became an altar boy,
serving the priest at mass. I liked learning the prayers and the Latin
responses to the priest, but did not make much headway with my other
studies.

I liked the dear, simple old priest to whom I made my first confession,
and at times thought I would like some day to be a priest myself.
Between my admiration for old Thomas, the coachman, with his stormy
stories of the war, and my love for the quiet old priest, my mind was
always pulling me this way and that—whether I should become a priest,
or a soldier like Tommy, limping around with his short leg and his
rheumatism.

One day when I was waiting for the mail I heard a nice old lady ask the
postmaster whose boy I was.

He said, “That’s one of the boys from the convent.  You can tell them a
block away. They are all perfect little gentlemen. They say ‘Please’ and
‘Thank you.’ I do not know how the Sisters do it, but they can surely
bring boys up. I wish I could do it with mine.”

When I returned with the mail I told the Superior what I heard the
postmaster say about her and her boys. She seemed very much pleased,
smiled, and said: “Boys are good when they are taught to say their
prayers and to fear God.” Shortly after, I was appointed “mailman.” I
went to the village every day after school. When the weather was fine I
walked; if it was bad, I rode in or on the coach with Tommy.  This was
the first and only “appointment” of my life.  I did not think it over
then, but I know now I was not given it because I said “please” or my
prayers—I got it because I had told the Superior the nice things the
postmaster said. “Please” is a good word in its place; but it does not
get one appointed to anything. It has a proper place in a small boy’s
vocabulary. And it is also much used by a certain class of prisoners and
supplicants who are always “pleasing” somebody and are never pleasant to
anybody.

Your capable beggar on the street does not say “please.” He rips off his
spiel in such exact and precise language that he gets your dime without
it. You so admire his “art” that you do not miss the “please.” His is an
art. He omits the “please” because he knows you do not use it except
when you want the mustard.

Looking back, it seems to me that our life in the convent was not
properly balanced. We had none of the rough, boisterous times so dear to
the small boy, no swimming, baseball, football. We were a little too
cloistered, too quiet, too subdued. There was no wrestling, no boxing,
no running and jumping and squabbling and shuffling and shouldering
about. Of course I learned all those later. But I learned them quickly,
too quickly—all in a bunch. That put me out of balance again. Those
exercises should have been mixed in with my studies and prayers.

One stormy day I came out of the post office and as usual handed up the
paper to Tommy, whose habit it was to glance at the headlines and return
it to me.  This day, however, he found something that interested him. He
put the horses’ lines between his legs and crossed his knees on them. I
sat beside him on the box and shivered in the wind. He read on and on,
column after column, then turned to an inner page, fighting the paper in
the wind.

At last, and it seemed an hour, he folded it up carefully and returned
it to me. “Good news to-day, Tommy?” “No, boy, no good news. Bad news,
awful news, terrible news.” He spoke in an awed voice, a voice that
carried reverence. “Terrible news —Jesse James has been murdered,
murdered in cold blood and by a traitor.”

He fell silent and spoke to me no more that day.  Later he told me many
things about Jesse James. He worshiped him, and like many other good
people of Missouri firmly believed that neither of the James boys ever
fired a shot except in defense of their rights.

I delivered the mail and hastened to tell the other boys that Jesse
James was dead, “murdered.” Many of the older boys knew all about him—he
was their hero, too—and the things they told me made me decide to get
the paper and read his story myself. The next day, strangely enough, I
passed the Superior’s office when she was out to lunch. The paper was
folded neatly, lying on some older papers on the corner of her neat
desk. I walked in and took it. I put it away carefully, but many days
passed before I got to the reading of it. I was so occupied with my
duties as altar boy, and so busy with preparing for my first communion
and learning new prayers, that the James boys and all other worldly
things had no place in my mind.

Those were intense days. I lived in another world.

At last I found time to read my paper. On my way for the mail I slowly
dug out the story of Jesse James’ life and death, word by word. How I
studied the picture of this bearded and be-pistoled hero! And the
sketches of his shooting and the house in which it was done. Then came
the story of his bereaved mother.  How my boyish sympathy went out to
her, as she wept for her loss and told the story of the lifelong
persecution of her boys, Jesse and Frank, and how she feared that the
hunted fugitive, Frank James, would also be dealt with in the same
traitorous fashion. How I loathed the traitor, Bob Ford, one of the
James boys gang, who shot Jesse when his back was turned, for a reward!
How I rejoiced to read that Ford was almost lynched by friends and
admirers of Jesse, and had to be locked in the strongest jail in the
state to protect him from a mobbing. I finished the story entirely and
wholly in sympathy with the James boys, and all other hunted, outlawed,
and outraged men.

When I had done with the paper I passed it along to the other boys, who
read it and handed it about till it was finally captured by the
Superior. It was limp and ragged from usage. The Superior promptly
traced it back to me. When asked where I got it, I told her I had taken
it from her desk. I was lectured severely on the wrong of taking things
without asking for them. I told her I did not ask for it because I was
afraid she might refuse me. She said nothing, and did not offer to give
me any, from which I understood that we were not to have papers. I was
also relieved of my job as mailman. I was no longer to be trusted.

My teacher heard of my disgrace. She took me into her study, and we
talked the thing over. The loss of my job was nothing; I would be going
home soon, anyway. I must not feel bad about the lecture, I had done
nothing wrong. I would have returned the paper, only the other boys
wanted to read it. I discovered that she looked at it the same way I
did.

She asked me if I wanted more papers. I was on fire for papers and told
her so. She promised to get me one every day, and did. When I read it I
returned it to her.

The James boys’ story ran on for days and I followed it word for word,
sympathizing with the hunted fugitive, Frank, wishing I were old enough
and strong enough to find him and help him escape his pursuers and
avenge his brother’s death.

When that story was over I turned to other crime stories and read
nothing else in the papers. Burglaries, robberies, murders—I devoured
them all, always in sympathy with the adventurous and chance-taking
criminals. I reconstructed their crimes in my boyish mind and often
pictured myself taking part in them.  I neglected my studies and prayers
to rove about in fancy with such heroes as Jimmy Hope, Max Shinburn, and
“Piano Charlie,” famous “gopher men,” who tunneled under banks like
gophers and carried away their plunder after months of dangerous
endeavor.

Looking back now I can plainly see the influence the James boys and
similar characters had in turning my thoughts to adventure and later to
crime.




CHAPTER III


At last the day came for me to go home, for I had passed my fourteenth
birthday and was too old to stay at the Sisters’ School.

I wanted to kiss my favorite teacher good-by, but didn’t quite dare do
it. So I rode down to the station with Tommy, who bought me a fifty-cent
knife, out of his salary, only twelve dollars a month, and went away to
join my father.

Father took me back to the same hotel, to the same room. He had occupied
it during the three years I had been away, and the only change was that
he put a small bed in it for me. Everything was new and strange to me.
Men coming and going all day, eating and drinking. Everything was noise
and bustle, and it took me a few days to get used to this new life.

I found lots of papers lying around—some cheap novels, Police Gazettes,
etc.—and I read them all, everything I could get hold of. I saw my
father only at night, and occasionally we would take a walk then for an
hour.

One evening as we were returning from our walk, we came upon a man whose
team of horses was stalled in a mud hole. He was beating the horses, and
cursing them with the most fearful oaths. I stopped still in my tracks
and began praying for him. Father looked back, saw me standing still,
and said: “What are you doing, John, listening to that mule skinner
swear?”

I finished my prayer and caught up with him.

“You will learn to swear soon enough, John, without stopping to listen
to these teamsters,” he said a little severely.

In self-defense I told him I was not listening to the man, but praying
for him. “The Sisters taught us to do that,” I said. “They taught us to
pray for all sinners.”

Father wore a long beard, the custom of his day.  When he was very
thoughtful or vexed with some problem, he had a habit of twisting up the
end of his beard into a pigtail. He would then put the pigtail between
his teeth and chew on it.

After I explained what I had been doing, he looked at me strangely,
twisted up his beard, put the end in his mouth, and began chewing. He
took my hand, something he never did before, and we walked home in
silence. He went straight upstairs, and I found some fresh papers, which
I read downstairs. When I went up to go to bed he was sitting in his
chair, staring at the wall and still chewing his beard. My coming
aroused him. He said, “Good night, John,” and we went to bed.

The next evening he came in as usual. He read his paper and I read
whatever came to my hand. When we went upstairs, he said: “John, the
Sisters taught you many prayers, did they?” “Yes, sir, all the prayers.
I know them all,” I said proudly.

“How about reading?” he asked. I read him a piece from a newspaper
fairly well.

“And writing, John? Yes, I know you learned to write and spell. Your
letters to me were very good.  How’s your arithmetic, John? How many are
eight times nine, John?”

I was stuck. I hesitated and blushed. He saw my confusion and gave me an
easier one. “Seven times six, John?”

I was stuck again and got more confused. “Start at the beginning, John,
maybe you can get it that way.”

I started at seven times one, got as far as seven times four, and fell
down. This was torture. I think he saw it, too, for he said, “Oh, well,
John, that will come to you later. Don’t worry about it; just keep on
trying.”

He was a sharp at mathematics, and I think my failure to learn
multiplication hurt him more than if he had caught me spelling bird with
a “u,” or sugar with two “gs.” After a month of idleness it was decided
that I should go to the district school, which had been built in our
town while I was at the Sisters’. I got a new set of books and started
bravely off.

We had a woman teacher, very strict, but fair to us all. I learned
rapidly everything but arithmetic, which did not seem to agree with me,
nor does it yet, for that matter. I also learned to play ball, football,
marbles, and, I must admit, hooky, the most fascinating of all small-boy
games. These new games, and so many other interesting new things, soon
crowded the prayers into the background of my mind, but not entirely out
of it. I said them no more at night and morning, nor any other time. But
I still remember them, and I believe now, after forty prayerless years,
I could muster a passable prayer if the occasion required it and there
were not so many people about who could do it so much better.

After school, having no chores to do, I loitered around the hotel
office. One day I found a dime novel entitled, “The James Boys.” I
seized upon it and devoured it. After that I was always on the lookout
for dime novels. I found a place where they were sold.  I would buy one
and trade with some other boy when it was read. If I could not trade
it, I took it back to the store and the woman gave me a five-cent one
for it. The nickel one was just as thrilling, but shorter. I read them
all. “Old Sleuth,” “Cap Collier,” “Frank Reade,” “Kit Carson.”
Father saw me with them, but never bothered me. One day he brought
me one of Fenimore Cooper’s Leatherstocking tales.  I read it and
was cured of the five- and ten-cent novels.

Between going to school and to the depot in the evening to see the train
come in, and hanging around the hotel bar watching the town’s celebrated
ones, especially the “bad men” who had killed or shot somebody somewhere
some time, I put in fairly busy days.  The time flew.

I got to be quite looked up to by the other boys of my age. I “lived at
the hotel,” had “nobody to boss me around,” didn’t have to “run errands
and chop kindling and go after the groceries and carry milk.” When a new
boy showed up, I was the one to show him around. I remember distinctly,
now, that in less than a year after I left the Sisters, I was going down
the street with a new boy when we came upon one of the town drunkards
and bad men. I pointed him out with pride. “See that old fellow? That’s
old Beverly Shannon. He’s been out to Leadville. He killed a man out
there and nearly got hung. You ought to hear him swear when he gets
drunk and falls down and nobody will help him up.”

There was admiration in my voice. Our town was full of bad men. All had
been in the war on one side or the other. Everybody had a pistol or two,
and a shotgun or a rifle. Everybody knew how to use them.  No small
boy’s outfit was complete without a pistol.  Usually it was a rusty old
“horse pistol,” a cap-and-ball affair, some old relic of the Civil War.
By a great stroke of fortune I got two of them. I was helping an old
lady to move some things out of her cellar when we ran across them in a
trunk.

“Lord, Lord,” she said, “are those awful things here yet? I thought they
had been thrown away years ago. Johnnie, take them out and bury them
somewhere. Throw them away so I will never see them again.”

These two old pistols made me feel important, established. I began to
look about me. It was time I began to be somebody. My latest hero was
the man that kept the bar in the hotel. He owned the building, leased
the hotel, and ran the bar himself.  He was a fat man, and he wore a
fancy striped vest with a heavy gold watch chain across it and a
twenty-dollar gold piece dangled from the chain for a charm.  He had
been out to California. It was the only twenty-dollar piece in the town.
He was a small politician, the town fixer. When anybody got into any
trouble and had to go before the justice of the peace, he went down to
the hotel and saw “Cy” Near. Cy would say, “Leave it to me, that’s all,
leave it to me.” When it was all over the fellow would come down to
“Cy’s” and order drinks for everybody in sight, several times.  Then he
would say, “What do I owe you, Cy?”

“Owe me? Owe me for what?”

“Why, you know, Cy, for fixing up that little trouble.”

“Oh, that’s what you mean. Say, you don’t owe me a thin dime, not a
greasy nickel.” Cy would wave a fat arm in the air. “I don’t take money
for helping my friends. I sell licker, good licker; that’s my business.”

The chap would buy a few more rounds of drinks, thank Cy again, and
start for the door. Cy would shout, “Hey, George, I forgot to tell you.
I’m rafflin’ off a hoss an’ buggy and you’d better take a half dozen
tickets. You stand to win a good rig.”

Around election time Cy would round up all the fellows he could, remind
them that he had befriended them, and say, “What do we care who’s
President of the United States? What we want is a decent justice of the
peace and town marshal.”

I decided to pattern my life after Cy’s. He was a popular, successful
man. I began swinging my arms about, talking in a loud, hoarse voice,
wearing my hat on the back of my head. Cy smoked big cigars. I tried
one, and gave up the notion of smoking, at least for a while.

It was not long till my fancy for the saloon keeper changed. One evening
when the train came in a single traveler got off. He was a tall, lean
man, who walked like a soldier, erect and with a confident step.  He had
a short, stubby, gray mustache. He wore a gray suit, a gray hat, and
held a pair of gloves in his hand. He walked quickly toward the front of
the train and waited by the baggage car till a trunk was tossed out. An
express man near by was told to take the trunk over to the hotel.

I followed the gray man to the hotel. Presently the trunk was left in
front and I went to inspect it. It was a leather trunk, with brass
fittings, plastered over with stickers from many hotels and steamship
lines.  It was scratched and battered and travel-stained. The thing
fascinated me. I stood around and felt it, read the stickers, some of
them from foreign parts of the world, and wondered what kind of man he
could be that possessed such a wonderful trunk.

I was restless and disturbed when the porter took it upstairs out of my
sight. It had roused strange thoughts and longings in my mind that I did
not understand then. I know now that it suggested travel, adventure by
land and sea—the world.

I now pulled my hat down from the back of my head and wore it properly.
I straightened up, kept my hands out of my pockets, walked with a quick
step, and assumed a confident, positive manner. I even began to think
about a mustache, bristly, cut down like the gray man’s. I must have a
gray suit, gray hat, gloves, and a leather trunk. A big problem for a
boy with no income.

I determined to earn some money and looked about for after-school work.
After my father, I thought the saloon man, Cy, was the wisest man in our
town. For some reason which I never could figure out, I did not submit
the matter to my father, but went to the saloon man. Maybe it was
because he was easier to talk to.  We went over the situation carefully.
There was no job in sight that either of us could think of. At last Cy
said, “Well, if you’re so crazy about a job, I’ll make one for you.”

Cy was a bachelor, and lived in a single room in the hotel. He opened
and closed his bar, did all the work, was always drinking, but no one
ever saw him drunk.

“You can come in here in the morning before school and clean the place
up. Sweeping out ain’t no man’s job, anyway, and I’m tired of it. You
can wash up the glasses and dust up around the bar. In the afternoon
when you come home from school, you can be around in case there’s any
errands. At night you can look after the pool table, collect for the
games, and see that they don’t steal the balls. You can serve the drinks
when there’s a card game, and bring a new deck when some sore loser
tears the old one up.”

I was so grateful to Cy that I gave him my very best “thank you.” Here
was a chance to get on in life, to have my own money, and be independent
and mix around with men—to learn something of the world. I was so taken
with this notion that I hunted up the broom, which was worn down to the
strings, and began sweeping out the barroom. There were no customers in
the place. Cy stood by, his hat on one side of his head, a big cigar in
the opposite side of his mouth, hands in pockets, and eyed me
thoughtfully.  When I had the place about half swept out, Cy came over
and took the broom out of my hands. He turned it about, examined it
carefully. “Johnnie, I think you’re on the square with me, and I’m going
to be on the up and up with you. You go to the store and get yourself a
new broom.”

I did that, and swept the place all over again.  Having started to work
without my father’s permission I decided to say nothing till I got well
settled in my job.  I had a feeling that he might veto the whole thing
if I told him at the start, but if I waited a while and had a few
dollars saved up he might let me continue.

Father knew Cy very well. On rare occasions he went into the bar and had
a drink and a talk with him.

I worked faithfully, early and late. At the end of the week, in the
afternoon when there was no customer about, Cy mysteriously beckoned me
into his “office,” a small closet of a room at one end of the bar. It
was simply furnished—a table, a chair, a large spittoon, one picture on
the wall opposite the desk. A picture of the mighty John L. Sullivan in
fighting pose. Cy seated himself at the table, put on a pair of glasses,
and drew out a small notebook. He looked carefully about the room.
Seeing the door of his office open, he told me to close it.

To me Cy had always been much of a mystery. He had been “out West”—to
Leadville, Deadwood, and San Francisco. He owned the latest pattern of
repeating rifle and a couple of “forty-fives.” He played poker. I
thought I was now to be initiated into some of the secret activities of
his life. Maybe he would ask me to do something dangerous. Well,
whatever it was, I would do it. He wrote something in the notebook, then
took three silver dollars out of his pocket and put them in my hand,
carefully, without clinking them.

“Johnnie, this is pay day.”

I went back to work happy. Pay day, three dollars of my own money. I
would have a gray suit, gray hat, gloves, and a leather trunk in no
time. I would soon be a tall, handsome, distinguished-looking gentleman,
on Cy’s money. I jingled my three dollars loudly and could hardly wait
for my father to come home so I could tell him about my working and ask
him to mind my money for me.

The possession of three dollars changed me at once.  I became
independent, confident, secure. When father came in I went to him
without a single misgiving, feeling sure he would approve. I had my
money in my hand and my spirit was high. I told him I had been working
for Mr. Near all week; that I had three dollars in wages and wanted him
to take care of them for me. He took the money and put it in his
pocket, saying: “All right. Let me know when you want it.”

“And you don’t mind my working for Cy?”

“No. I don’t mind. Cy told me all about it.  You will have to learn to
work some time. And you will have to learn lots of other things. So you
may as well start at Cy’s.”

He turned to his paper, and I thought the thing was settled, but as I
went out of the room I saw him twisting up the end of his long beard.

The school work was no trouble to me. I put in a year, and vacation time
came along almost before I knew it. I was saving all the money I earned
as assistant to Cy, and was looking forward to earning more during
vacation. I brought home to my father a report from the school which
seemed to show that I had made good progress. He glanced at the card and
threw it to one side.

“I suppose you have the multiplication table this time, John?”

“Oh, yes, I learned it at last.”

“How many are eight times nine, John?”

“Seventy-two, sir.”

“Good. Seven times six?”

“Forty-two, sir.”

“Correct, John.”

He did not seem to be much interested in my correct and prompt answers;
kept on looking at his paper.  Finally he looked at me and said: “And
eight times thirteen, John?”

I was stuck again. This one froze me stiff. I got mad, red in the face.
I took pencil and paper out of my pockets, figured it out, and give him
the result. It seemed that he was taking advantage of me. Nobody at
school had ever asked me that question. I felt wronged. I thought of my
money and my two big horse pistols. If I was to be treated in this way I
would take my money and pistols and go away where I could get a square
deal. And if I did not get a square deal, I’d take it.

Father looked at the paper I gave him. “Why, you have it right, John.
That’s good, very good.” He was stroking his beard thoughtfully, and I
could not tell whether he was smiling or making a face.

Vacation was almost over. I needed new books for the coming season and
spoke to father about them one night.

“Never mind them now. We will see about them later. We are going away,
going to Kansas City. I have been promoted after all these years.”

“But I will lose my job,” I demurred.

“I’ll get you another job. Don’t worry. Do you want a regular job,
working all day, or would you like to go to school some more?”

I decided to have an all-day job, and let the school go.

“All right,” he said, “we’ll see about it.”

My father made no fuss about leaving the small town where he had spent
ten years of his life. He had no close friends or cronies. After my
mother died, he seldom spoke to any one but me, and I think he was glad
to go away. He was a cold, hard, silent Scotch-Irishman. He took no part
in social doings, never went to church, belonged to no clubs; nor was he
enough interested in politics to become a citizen and exercise the high
privilege of voting on election day.

My good-bys did not take much time. Cy was sorry to have me go. He
laboriously wrote me a fine letter of recommendation which he gave me
along with a large, worn silver watch, that wound with a key. It weighed
almost a pound, and I was proportionately proud of it. My boy friends
envied me in going away to a big city and impressed upon me the
necessity for taking my pistols with me. Unnecessary advice; I had no
intention of leaving them behind.

And last of all I hunted up old Beverly Shannon, the bad man. He was a
hooknosed old man with hard eyes and a long chin whisker dripping
tobacco juice.  He had worn the Northern blue, and drew a small pension
for a “bad leg.” Times when he was half drunk, limping around town in
search of more drinks, some one would say: “Look out, ‘Bev.’ You’re
limpin’ on the wrong leg.” This always brought a string of eloquent
curses from him, and a warning that they had “better be keerful. I
hain’t stopped killin’ jest ’cause Abe Lincoln says the war’s over.”

In those days all roads led to the harness shop, and there “old Bev” was
always to be found when sober, outside the shop on a bench under a tree.
There he met all the droughty farmers and entertained them with war
stories and tales of his wanderings “out West.” He was always invited to
drink with them.  His pension kept him in food. His life held no serious
problem.

I found him on his bench, sober and sorry for it.  He passed the time of
day with me, and I told him I was going away and had come to say
good-by.

“Goin’ to the city, huh? Well, don’t let ’em rub it into you. You ain’t
a very strong boy.” He was a foxy old man. He leered at me out of his
cunning eyes. “Have you got any shootin’ irons?” Long John Silver, the
pirate, could not have done any better in the way of complimenting a
boy. I was fairly hooked. I assured him that I was well heeled, having
two pistols.

“That’s good. You’ll git along all right. Now you run along. I’ve got to
git me a farmer. I ain’t had my whisky yet.”

I hastily dug up enough silver out of my small pocket money for a couple
of drinks, and gave it to him. As I went away I thought he looked like
an old spider watching his web for a fly.




CHAPTER IV


In his new position father was forced to travel much, often leaving me
to my own devices for weeks and sometimes months. I was put up at a
small boarding house kept by a widow, who had two children. She was
over-worked, sickly, and cranky. She had half a dozen boarders. Before
he left, father gave me the money I had saved up, and told me to look
about for a job.

There was nobody at the hotel that interested me.  The widow was always
whining and I kept away from her. Her children were too small for
company, and I saw nothing of the other boarders except at mealtimes
when they ate much and talked little.

The widow gave me a trunkful of books she had taken for a board bill.
Among them I found a battered old volume of Dumas’ “The Count of Monte
Cristo,” on which I put in many nights. This sharpened my appetite for
reading, and I went around secondhand bookstores, and got hold of the
D’Artagnan tales and devoured them. Then “Les Misérables,” and on to the
master, Dickens. The books so fired me with the desire for travel,
adventure, romance, that I was miserable most of the time. As my money
dwindled I resolved to find a job. I’d ask the landlady for advice.

I found her out in front, scrubbing the steps, red in the face and
vicious looking. I told her I was thinking of going to work.

“Well, it’s about time you thought of that,” she snapped, “layin’ around
here readin’ and eatin’ up your father’s money. You can get a job just
like I did when my husband run off and left me with two brats on my
hands. I just started out and asked for it at every place I come to till
I got it, that’s all. And you can do it, too, if you got the gizzard.”

I left her and started my search. If there was a job in the city I
determined to get it. I went through block after block, store after
store, hour after hour.  I got mostly “Noes” but some answered
pleasantly, taking my name and address. I kept going until one morning I
stopped in front of a cigar store—a dead-looking place, no customers. A
man was reading a paper spread out on the counter. I went in and put my
question to him. When he stood up I saw he was very tall and very thin.
He looked sick. I had never seen an eye like his. It attracted me
strangely. I could not have described it then, but I can now. It was a
larcenous eye. He was very nice, asking many questions. How old was I?
Did I ever work before?  Where? I handed him Cy’s letter. He read it and
asked me more questions. I have never answered so many questions since,
except in a police station. At last he quit, and snapping himself
together like a man coming out of a trance, he rapped his knuckles on
the counter.

“I’ll tell you what I’ll do with you, kid. You come down here at nine
o’clock every morning, open this joint up, and stay here till one
o’clock. Then I come on and you go off till six in the evening. At six
you come on and stay till ten, and call it a day. You can go to work
right now. The sooner the better. In a week you will know the prices of
the different things as well as I do, and I can leave you by yourself.
Your wages will be three dollars a week and all the cigars you can
smoke.”

“But I do not smoke.”

“Well, that’s your bad luck, kid, not mine. What do you say? Want to
chance the job?”

I got right in behind the counter and he showed me the different cigars,
cigarettes, and tobaccos, and told me their prices. In a week I knew all
about the “store” and had learned to serve the few customers that came
in, and to make change properly. I further learned that the store was
but a “front” or blind for a poker game and dice games in the back room,
and that I was a part of the “front.” My business was to sweep the place
out in the morning, stand behind the counter in case any one wanted a
cigar, and to keep an eye out for “new coppers on the beat” in the
evening. The job was interesting. I soon came to know the poker players,
crap shooters, and dice sharks who brought their victims into the back
room to “clean” them. I often spent my afternoons in the back room
watching the games and learning the life.

When there was no game, the sharks sat around practicing their tricks
and bewailing their bad luck.  Sometimes a poker player would show me
how to “shuffle up a hand,” or cut the cards at a given place or “go
out” with a hand. The dice shakers and crap shooters showed me their
favorite “shots.” I was an apt scholar, absorbing everything like a
young sponge.  “Tex,” my boss (if he had any other name I never heard
it), admonished me never to gamble. “Lay away from it, kid; it’s a tough
racket. Look at me and my gatherings of forty years. I ain’t got a white
quarter to my name; if it was rainin’ soup I couldn’t buy myself a tin
spoon, and I’ve got a string of debts longer than a widow’s
clothesline.”

Next door to the cigar store there was a small milk depot kept by a man
and his wife. I used to go in every day for a glass of milk, and got
acquainted with them. He delivered milk around his routes and the wife
minded the shop. He was forever complaining about not being able to
collect his money from “them women.” “Them women” were women who kept
“parlor houses” in the Tenderloin district a few blocks from his milk
store. They were good pay, but he could not get away from his work at
the right hour to find them.

One day he told me he would pay me well if I would take the bills and go
to the places and stay till I got the money. Here was a chance to earn
more money, and I grabbed it. I went in and asked Tex, my boss, when
would be the best time to call at those places to collect the milk
bills.

If Tex had not gathered much of worldly goods in his forty years, he had
at least learned something of the habits of “them women.” “I’ll tell
you,” he said.  “If you go in the morning you’ll find them asleep; in
the afternoon they are out riding or shopping; and at night they will be
either too busy or too drunk.  Take my advice and go about five o’clock
in the evening and you will catch them at dinner, or breakfast, or
whatever they call it.”

I followed Tex’s advice that evening and collected three bills out of
five. The milkman was pleased with my enterprise and gave me a dollar.
Thereafter I collected his bills in the Tenderloin. I visited certain
places weekly and was paid promptly. The women I met were nice to me,
and I saw nothing of the other side of their lives. I worked faithfully
at my two jobs, saved my money, and began looking in the store windows
for my gray suit and gray hat. My work kept me so busy that I did not
read much. Thoughts of travel and adventure were in the back of my
mind, but that could wait. I was young; I must have money first. My
two old, rusty pistols, almost forgotten now, lay neglected in the
bottom of my little valise.

Tex had a “run of luck” and raised me to four dollars a week. I
collected more bills for the milkman.  Some of them he called “bad
bills.” I kept after them persistently and nearly always got the money.
The more hopeless the bill, the greater my commission was.  I enjoyed
going after them. The Tenderloin women were sure pay; and poor families
were good, always had the money ready. I called on a tough saloon man,
in a dingy little dive, about ten times to collect a two-dollar bill.

One day when I called he was serving several men at his bar, and when he
saw me he said: “No use comin’ in here with that bill, kid. I ain’t
goin’ to pay it. If your boss comes up here I’ll bust him in the nose.
His milk is no good and he’s no good.”

“Mister,” I said, “I know he is no good, but I have to work and want to
keep my job. If you knew just how hard my boss is you would feel sorry
for me instead of being angry. He is so hard and no good that he told me
if I did not collect your bill of two dollars to-day I need not come
to work to-morrow, and that’s why I’m here.”

The customers looked at me. I stood my ground.

“Hell,” said the man, “I didn’t think he was that bad. Here, take the
lousy money.”

I hurried back to the milkman. “Here’s Mr.  Finucane’s two dollars.”

“How on earth did you ever collect it?”

“Oh, he just got tired and paid me, that’s all.”

“Well, I’ll make you a present of them,” said he handing me the money.
“You certainly earned them.”

The following week I called at Madam Kate Singleton’s with my bill. The
colored maid who opened the door showed me a seat in the hall and told
me to wait.  The madam was dressing. I sat there a few minutes and there
was a ring at the door. The maid opened it and an excited little man
brushed in, followed by two big men who were not a bit excited. As the
door was closing I got a glimpse of a policeman in uniform on the steps.

One of the two men spoke to the maid who went upstairs, and in a minute
the madam came down. She waved the men into a room off the hall and
closed the door. I listened, but they talked too low for me to hear what
they were saying. Presently the madam opened the door and called out:
“Oh, girls, come downstairs every one of you.” Half a dozen girls
appeared as if by magic. They were all brought into the room and the
door closed again.

Nobody paid any attention to me. Now I heard loud voices in the room,
but so many were talking at once that I could make nothing of it. Then
one of the big men came out, went to the front door, opened it, and said
to the policeman: “Send Mike around to the back; tell him to let nobody
out. I’ll phone for the wagon. We’ll have to take them all to the
station.  They won’t talk.”

He disappeared into the room. I got up and opened the front door.

“Where are you goin’?” said the policeman.

“I’m going out, if you please.”

“Get back in there, if you please,” he snarled, “and stay there.”

While the officers were waiting for the wagon one of the big men went
upstairs and brought down two “guests.” They were about half awake and
looked as if they had been on a drunk. They sat down beside me on the
settee. One of them fell into a sound sleep and the other sat with his
elbows on his knees and his hands on the sides of his head. Neither of
them spoke. In a few minutes the wagon arrived. The girls were all
ordered to go out and get in it, which they did. Then the two men and I
were ordered to do the same. The madam and one of the big men got into a
hack that appeared to be waiting and drove away.

The excited little man who had caused all the trouble got into the wagon
with the other big man and sat beside him.

When I was being put in the wagon I protested and tried to explain, but
the detectives roughly ordered me to shut up. The “harness cop” who had
been at the front door went back to his beat. I did not see anything of
Mike, who had been ordered to stay at the back door.

The girls laughed and joked on the way to the station and shouted
“rubberneck” at everybody that looked in at the back of the open wagon.
The police station was on one corner of Market Square, one of the
busiest corners in the city. Hundreds of people were there daily,
selling their produce. Their time was about evenly divided between
serving their customers and watching the patrol wagon spewing its loads
of humanity into the city prison. It seemed to me they were all there as
we were unloaded and hurried through a solid lane of them into the
police station.  Madam Singleton was there before us, and with her was a
tall, sharp-looking man, gray and about fifty.  I never found out who he
was, but he looked like a lawyer.

The madam, the tall man, and the two big men, who were plain-clothes
detectives, went to one side, talking earnestly for a minute or two. The
rest of us just stood there and waited. One of the detectives went into
an office off the big room we were in, and came out at once with a man
in uniform he called “captain.” The captain was a big, red-faced,
gray-haired, good-natured Irishman. “Well, what’s this all about?” he
said, smiling. The detective stepped over to the small, nervous man and
said to the captain:

“Captain, this man complains that one of the girls in Kate Singleton’s
place took one hundred dollars, two fifty-dollar bills, from him some
time last night or this morning. We went down to her place and saw the
girl. She denies that she took it.

“We searched her room and couldn’t find it. The balance of them don’t
know anything, so they say. He wants them all searched. We couldn’t do
it there, so we pinched everybody in the house and here they are, ten of
’em, seven women and three men.”

The captain took the little man in hand. “Who are you?” The little man
hesitated.

“Come on, out with it. If you want any help here you’ve got to come
clean.”

The little man gave him a name. I could not hear it.

“Where are you from?”

“Emporia, Kansas, is my town.”

“What do you do for a living?”

“I’m a hog raiser.”

“When did you come to the city?”

“Yesterday morning.”

“What did you come here for?”

“Oh, just to look around.”

The captain smiled. “How much money did you have when you got off the
train here yesterday morning?”

“I had two hundred dollars in paper money and some small change.”

“How much have you spent since you arrived here?”

“I spent twenty-five dollars for a suit of clothes and fifteen dollars
for an overcoat. I paid a dollar for a room and I spent about five
dollars around town.”

“Is that all? Are you sure, now? Think again.”

“Yes, that’s all,” said the hog man.

“You’re a liar,” Madam Singleton said in a cold, level voice. “You gave
Julia ten dollars.”

“Now, now, Kate,” said the captain, “don’t get excited. I’ll take care
of this thing all right.” Then to the hog man:

“Guess you forgot about that ten dollars, hey?”

“Yes, I forgot that,” he said meekly.

“All right; now, how much have you in your pockets?”

He took out some bills and counted them.  “Forty-five dollars is all I
have.”

The captain counted them and returned them.  “That’s correct. Now, which
girl took your money?”

The man pointed out the youngest girl of the bunch.  She was about
twenty or twenty-two, a plump girl with a boyish face and lots of black
hair. She was pleasant looking, but not pretty, and she did not look as
worn and tired as the others.

She looked straight at him but never opened her mouth. The
lawyer-looking man said to her: “Julia, did you take that man’s money?”

“No,” she answered.

“Take all these women in and have the matron search them. Madam
Singleton, you have no objection to being searched, have you?” smiled
the captain.

“None at all, captain, only make it short and sweet.  I am losing time
and money here.”

They all trooped off to a room down the hall.

An officer came out from behind the desk and searched me and the two
drunks. We had no fifty-dollar bills, so he told us to sit on a bench in
front of his desk. The lawyer, or bondsman, or fixer, or whatever he
was, paced up and down the room nervously.  The captain had gone back to
his office.

In a few minutes a big, mannish-looking woman with red hands and a tough
walk came along.

“Well, what did you find?” said the lawyer.

“Nothing. They didn’t have a hundred dollars among them.”

The lawyer then hunted up the detective and the hog man. The detective
got the captain. The matron made her report and the officer who searched
me and the other two did the same.

The captain turned to the hog man.

“All these people have been searched and your money has not been found.
What do you want to do now?”

“I want that girl locked up. I know she got my money. I know I had two
fifty-dollar bills rolled up with my other bills when I went into that
house, and when I got to my room I looked at my money and they were
gone.”

“How long was it before you got to your room after you left Madam
Singleton’s?” asked the lawyer.

“Oh, I walked around for an hour or two.”

“Oh, you did, eh? Why, you probably had your pocket picked on the
street.”

The big captain roared out a laugh and said to the lawyer:

“It must have been an Emporia, Kansas, pickpocket.  No Missouri dip
would take his roll, extract two fifty-dollar bills, and put the rest
back in his pocket.”

The lawyer appeared to get angry. “You’ve searched everybody but me.”

He turned to the hog man fiercely. “Do you want me searched?”

“No, I don’t.”

“Well, I want you searched. You are just the kind of a yap that gets up
in the middle of the night and hides his money so carefully that he has
to have a policeman find it for him in the morning. Go ahead and search
him,” he said to the detective.

“All right, go ahead,” said the hog man.

The detective went through his trousers carefully, placing everything on
a counter, then through his vest, then into his inner coat pocket. No
money. Then, as an afterthought, just to make a good job of it, he felt
in the coat pockets. In the first one was a bag of tobacco, and as he
pulled a handkerchief from the last coat pocket two bills fluttered to
the floor.

The lawyer stooped, picked up the two bills, looked at them, and handed
them to the captain. The hog man’s eyes bulged till they looked ready to
fall out of his head. He was making a dry noise down in his throat that
sounded like the quack of a duck. The captain handed him the bills.

“Is this your money?” he scowled.

After inspecting the bills and recovering his voice, the hog man said:
“Yes, I think it is.”

The lawyer plucked him by the lapel with one hand, and shook the other
in his face. “You dirty little swine, get your property off that
counter. Get out of here and back to your hog pastures before I have you
locked up.”

The dazed and thoroughly crushed victim hastily gathered up his things
and went out with them in his hands.

I was pop-eyed with amazement at this swift, smashing reversal of the
situation. The two drunks beside me were but mildly interested. Nobody,
from the captain down to Julia, the accused, seemed surprised.  I could
not understand why the whole crowd did not fall on the hog man and tear
him to pieces. The captain disappeared into his office. The detective
walked out to the sidewalk. The lawyer turned to Kate and the girls,
bowing:

“Madam, and ladies, shall we depart?”

“It’s about time,” said the madam in a positive voice. “I’m hungry
enough to eat a raw dog.”

They all moved out into the street. I was left on the bench with the two
drunks. The detective strolled back in. The desk man pointed to us.

“What will I do with this outfit, Hayes?”

Hayes appeared to be disgusted. “Oh, charge them with drunk.”

“The kid’s not drunk.”

“Vag him then.”

“What were you doing in that joint, anyway?” to me.

“I went in there to collect a milk bill, sir, and was waiting for the
money when all this happened.”

“Where is the bill?”

I produced it.

“Do you work for this man?” he asked, after inspecting it.

“Yes, sir.”

“Why in hell didn’t you say so at the start?”

“I tried to, sir, but everybody told me to shut up.  The policeman would
not let me go out.”

He turned to the drunks and asked them if they had ten dollars to put up
for bail to appear in the morning. They had, and the desk man took them
into another room. I saw them no more. When he came back, Hayes said:

“Take the kid upstairs: lock him up with George.  I’ll find out about
him.”

The women were gone, the drunks were out, and I was the only one
detained. It looked all wrong to me.  The sergeant took me down to the
end of the hall and opened an iron door. It was as if he had opened the
door to hell. My blood stopped circulating. We stepped inside and he
locked the door behind us.  Never since, except perhaps in the half
dreams of opium, have I been so frozen with horror. We were standing on
a balcony overlooking the half basement that served as the city prison.
In front of us was a latticework iron door that opened on an iron
stairway leading down into the cell house. The cells were built around
the four sides of a cement-floored square, and opened into it. It was
supper time and pandemonium was on.

The sergeant rapped on the iron door with his heavy keys, trying to
attract the attention of some one below. Failing to make himself heard,
he told me to stay there till he could get a “trusty” to take me
upstairs. He went out the way we came in, and left me locked in between
the two doors on the balcony.  The cells below had all been thrown open
and there were about fifty prisoners in the open space. They seemed to
be about equally divided between negroes and whites, of all ages. The
air choked me; it was putrid, heavy, and thick with the stench of foul
food, foul clothes, foul bodies, and foul sewers. In the farthest corner
of the square a gigantic black was standing guard over a huge smoking
caldron.

He was shirtless and barefoot. A leather belt supported his overalls,
his only clothing. Sweat glinted on his broad back and chest. He was
armed with a long-handled ladle which he dished out the “stew” with, or
beat back the stronger and more venturesome prisoners who crowded too
closely around the caldron.

I saw no jailers or guards. There was no pretense at order. The younger
and stronger men shoved and elbowed their way to the big stew pot,
snarling and snapping at each other like a pack of starved dogs.  Old
men and young boys stood around waiting meekly for the strong to be fed
first.

The big negro wielded his ladle, filling the tin pans nearest him. Bread
was being served from a large box in another spot, but there appeared to
be plenty of it and there was no scramble there. Several new-looking
prisoners walked about, making no effort to get food. They were “fresh
fish,” new arrivals, who had not yet acquired the “chuck horrors,” that
awful animal craving for food that comes after missing half a dozen
meals.

At last the weaker ones were served. The cursing, shouting, and fighting
were stilled. The big negro wheeled his stew pot away and the empty
bread box disappeared. Some of the prisoners went into their cells to
eat; some sat down outside on the floor, while others ate standing. Some
had spoons, others ate with their fingers, sopping at the bottom of the
pan with a piece of bread.

The meal was quickly over. The tin pans, unwashed, were thrown into the
cells. The young negroes began singing and buck dancing. White men who
had been tearing at each other ten minutes before around the big pot
were now laughing and talking in a friendly fashion, and everybody lit
up a smoke. The air was so filled with tobacco smoke and steam from the
stew that I could barely distinguish forms below.

It was growing dark and gas jets were lighted but gave no light. I heard
a rattling of keys; somewhere some one shouted “Inside.” The shadowy
forms shuffled into their cells, and there came the tremendous din of
iron doors being slammed shut. The prison was locked up for the night.

I do not know how long I had been standing there.  Not more than fifteen
minutes, but it seemed a lifetime. A trusty prisoner appeared at my
side.

“Come on, you.”

I followed him up a short stairway where he opened a door and we went
into a short hall with cells on either side. It was directly above the
city prison.  As we passed down the hall I heard women’s voices; one of
them shouted, “Fresh fish, girls.”

Faces appeared at the barred doors. A colored girl, as we passed her
cell, said: “Hello, boy, what you-all been doin’?”

At the end of the hall the trusty stopped at a large room with a barred
door. I could look inside. The room was well lighted. Newspapers were
lying about.  I saw two clean-looking cots, a table on which were books
and a box of cigars, and a couple of chairs.

A man was pacing up and down the room, smoking.  He wore a
comfortable-looking pair of slippers and was in his shirt sleeves. He
paid no attention to us till the trusty said: “George, the skipper sent
up some company for you.”

He turned sharply and came to the door. He was a fine-looking man about
forty years of age, well groomed, fresh shaven. He was tall. His hair
was gray. His face was pleasant to look at. He might have been a doctor
or lawyer. I found myself wondering what he could have done to get
locked in a jail.  He looked at me carefully for a minute. When he spoke
his voice was surprisingly pleasant. There was a suggestion of the South
in his drawl.

“I don’t want to hurt your feelings, kid, but if you are lousy don’t
come in here, that’s all.”

The trusty assured George that I was not lousy, that there was no charge
against me and I would be out in an hour or two.

I was locked in.

I had no jail manners then, so I just stood at the door with my hat on,
intending to wait there till some one came to let me go. All prisoners
do that the first time. Presently my companion told me to take my hat
off and sit down, and try to be comfortable.

“You may get out in an hour and you may not. You never can tell. You are
beginning young. How old are you?”

“Sixteen.”

“What are you pinched for?”

I told him all about it.

“That’s everyday business here,” he said. “Usually the sucker is a
married man and can’t squawk. But when he does squawk, like this one,
the only thing to do is to blow back his money. Either the lawyer or one
of the girls eased it into his coat pocket. That’s better than returning
it to him and admitting that they tried to rob him.

“The whole thing was a stand-in from the captain down. Everybody’s
satisfied. The sucker has his money, the girls are all out, Kate will
charge Julia fifty dollars for the lawyer’s fee, and that ends it.

“You appear to be the only real sucker in the bunch.  By God! Those
coppers are fierce. They’ll leave you here till you rot. I’ve always
said a copper is a copper till you cut his head off.”

He got a tin cup and scraped it across the bars of the door. The trusty
bounced in. “Go down and get the desk sergeant.”

I never saw a prisoner get quicker action. The sergeant came at once.

“It’s a rotten shame to keep this kid locked up, Sam.  Did you hear his
story? Go down and get Hayes and tell him to let him go home. Send a
messenger to his boss. I’ve got plenty of money down there; charge it to
me.”

The sergeant went out, promising to “look into it right away.” Our
cell—it was more like a room—was in a small corridor set apart for the
women prisoners’ quarters. Down the hall I could hear them calling to
each other and chatting back and forth from their cells.  Somewhere a
colored woman was singing a mournful dirge about “That Bad Stackalee.”
The verses were endless. The point of the song seemed to be that the
negro bully, Stackalee, had been killed with “a big forty-four gun over
a damned old Stetson hat.” In the most harrowing tones at the end of
every verse the singer moaned the sad refrain, “That ba-a-d Stackalee.”

Later I came to know that this song is a favorite among negroes when in
great trouble, such as being locked in jail, being double-crossed by a
friend, or parting with their money in a dice game. At such times thirty
or forty verses of “Stackalee” invariably restores the laughing good
humor and child-like confidence of the wronged one.

We heard a rattling of keys and a door opening.  George put the side of
his face against the cell door, so he could see down the hall.

“Get your hat, kid; here they are.”

The detective came up with my two bosses—the milkman and Tex, the
gambler. The trusty opened the door.

“Out you go,” said the detective, “and the next time you get jammed up
say something before you get thrown in. Holler before you’re hurt;
that’s my motto.”

I said good-by to my benefactor, George, and thanked him awkwardly. When
I met him years after and had a chance to return his kindness, I learned
he was a most distinguished criminal; a man who had stolen fortunes and
spent them, who had killed a crooked pal, and served many prison
sentences.

“Forget it, kid, and don’t let them scare you out of your job. You go
right back next week and collect your bills.”

Tex and the milkman escorted me to the cigar store.  The evening games
had not started when we went into the back room, so I told my story
again. The milkman sympathized and promised to raise my commission on
the bills. Tex was relieved to learn that I had not mentioned his
“store” to the police.

Collection day came around again, and I made my rounds without incident
till I got to Madam Singleton’s, the last place. A colored maid, the
only person that escaped arrest the week before, opened the door.  When
she saw me she screamed at the top of her voice:

“Oh, Miss Kate, here’s the pore milk boy.”

“Bring him right up here, Jo, this minute.”

The maid led me upstairs, then down a hall and to the madam’s room. She
was in the midst of dressing for the evening, but when I appeared in the
door she stopped, kicked a bunch of clothes to one side, came over and,
putting her arm around me, led me into the room.

“Well, you poor boy,” she patted my back. “We are ashamed to face you
after going off and forgetting you in jail. Julia thought of you about
nine o’clock that night, and I sent down word right away about you.
They said you were out and gone home. We never expected to see you
again. You must have dinner with us. It’s ready now, and Julia wants to
apologize to you. Not that it was her fault,” she added quickly.  “It
was just something that couldn’t be helped. Those men from the country
are always—ah—misplacing their money. We are continually having trouble
with them.”

She was so charming and friendly and natural, so different from the
crabby widow at my boarding house, the only woman I had any contact
with, that I found myself wondering if George had not been too severe in
judging them.

She went on with her dressing, and I looked about the room curiously. I
had a dim recollection of my mother’s room—a plain bed, a bureau, a big
rocking-chair, and a rag carpet. I had looked into the widow’s room at
the boarding house, too. That was plainer than my mother’s. It had a
cheap, single bed; a packing case covered with a sheet, and a cracked
mirror propped against the wall served as a bureau. There was a
hard-looking chair at the head of the bed. There was no carpet on the
widow’s floor.

Madam Singleton’s room had carpets an inch thick, and the biggest,
softest bed and the fattest pillows you could imagine. Her bureau was
half as large as the bed, but seemed too small for the things piled on
it—boxes, bottles, brushes, combs, pieces of jewelry, and a hundred
other articles I had never seen and could not guess the use of. Mirrors
were everywhere; from where I sat I could see my face, my profile, or my
back. A huge trunk, as big as a bungalow it looked, was in a corner. Its
top was thrown back and the tray was on the floor. It was piled high
with letters and cards and photos of men. The trunk was overflowing with
stockings, garters, ribbons, feathers, and soft, silky-looking garments.
My eyes strayed into the open door of a closet. It was full of coats and
cloaks, long and short, some of fur of different colors, and others of
expensive cloth. Wide rimmed and feathered hats hung everywhere, and the
carpet was half covered with shoes, slippers, sandals, gloves, and silk
dresses. Over everything hung the odor of perfume.  Years after I heard
Madam Singleton described as a very beautiful woman. When she turned
from her mirror, I thought she looked as a queen ought to look.

Tall, straight, dark-haired with big, brave black eyes; warm, full of
color, glowing; a dominating woman.

I heard a small bell tinkling downstairs.

“That means dinner, young man. Come with me.”




CHAPTER V


“Give me a name, any name you like,” said the madam as we went
downstairs. “I want you to meet my girls. They’ll all be glad to see you
again.”

I had but one name then, so I gave her that, and was introduced to the
girls who were waiting in the dining room, the same six girls that had
been arrested.  If they noticed my embarrassment they did not show it.
Two or three of them nodded, looked at me half curiously, half amused;
the others, excepting Julia, did not even glance at me. She came over to
where I stood, put her arms about my neck, and kissed me.

“Oh, you poor kid, I never felt so sorry for anything in my life.”

I was seated between the madam and Julia. The dinner was a marvel—fried
chicken, hot biscuits, green vegetables. Beer was served, but I did not
like it and the maid got me milk. The madam and Julia were the only ones
that ate heartily. The others picked at their food, yawned, and looked
at each other with low-lidded, feline calculating glances, seldom
speaking.  They looked and acted tired, worn, old, frustrated,
disappointed. A big dark woman opposite me got a bottle from the
sideboard and poured herself a drink of something.

“Now, my dear, be careful,” said the madam.

“Why didn’t you say that a year ago, Miss Kate?”

She took a piece of chicken in her fingers and went into a room across
the hall where she played “Annie Rooney” on the piano and sang with her
mouth full of food. Two others got up and went out. A blond girl pushed
her chair back, lighted a cigarette, and began doing her fingernails.
The maid came and whispered to another, who jumped up quickly and
disappeared.

Julia had finished the chicken and was crunching the bones between her
strong white teeth. The last of the tired-looking girls stood up, put
her foot on a chair, and ran her arm, elbow deep, into her stocking.
She came up with a small roll of bills which she threw across the table
to the madam, sullenly. “Thank the Lord that’s over,” she said, and went
out.

The madam counted the money carefully, bent over, and put both her arms
under the table; when she straightened up the money had disappeared.

Julia chattered away and ate everything in sight.  She wanted to know if
I had ever lived in the country, if I could ride a horse, if I had ever
caught a fish, if I could “shoot off a revolver.”

The dinner was over and I was thinking about my milk bill. After this
wonderful hour I hesitated about presenting it to the madam. She may
have seen what was in my mind, for she said, “Julia, you have talked so
much to this boy that he has forgotten what he came here for.”

“I’m not done talking yet, Miss Kate. You know Sunday is my day out, and
I’ve made up my mind to have a horseback ride in the country. I’ve been
wanting to do that ever since I came here and here is my chance. The kid
here can ride, and I’ll take him with me. If you’ll go,” turning to me.

I hesitated.

“Oh, come on. I’ll pay for the horses and everything, and see that you
get back before dark,” she laughed.

“All right, I’ll go,” I said.

Julia looked at the madam. “Oh, I have no objection, Julia. You’ll be
out of mischief for one day and you’re just a couple of kids, anyway.”

She took my bill, gave me the money and went out.

Julia was hopping around like a sparrow. “Let’s see,” she said. “You be
here Sunday morning at, oh, ten o’clock. No, not here, that’s no good.
Be at the drug store down on the corner at ten. I’ll meet you there.”

I promised to be there and departed. On my way home I passed the police
station and pictured in my mind the inferno inside—the big negro
swinging his ladle above the snarling, cursing horde of half-starved
prisoners in the stinking bowels of the city prison.

At Madam Singleton’s my boyish mind had not grasped the greater tragedy.
Fresh air, light, meat, drink, and music—that was all I saw there then.
But the tired women were prisoners more hopeless than the savage men
fighting for food in the jail.  The bodily comforts they had at Madam
Singleton’s but served to tighten their shackles. Life-timers of
society, they were slowly sinking without a straw to grasp at.

The time flew till Sunday. I looked over my clothes and wished I had my
gray suit and gray hat. I had saved my money but had not enough yet to
buy them.

I was apprehensive about meeting Julia. I could picture her coming into
the drug store for me in a dashing big hat, rustling silk dress,
expensive shoes, all powdered, perfumed, and painted as she was in Madam
Singleton’s. And me with my pants too short, my coat sleeves way up my
wrists, and my shirt open at the collar. I wanted to go, but at times my
heart failed me, and when I went to bed the Saturday night before I was
still undecided, hesitating.

Sunday morning I got up early, determined to face the thing. I also
settled another matter that had disturbed my mind of late. I got a
shave. I walked around till I found an idle barber in his empty shop.
He fixed me up with as much ceremony as if I had been an old customer.

At ten I was at the drug store, and Julia was inside, waiting. I had to
look twice to be sure of her. She wore a faded blue tailored suit, a
wide-rimmed straw sailor hat with a ribbon, and a pair of worn but
substantial shoes. No powder or paint, nothing to remind me of Madam
Singleton’s.

“Don’t pay any attention to my clothes.” She saw me looking at them.
“These are the ones I had on when I went there. I have lots of others,
but Miss Kate won’t let me wear them when I go out unless I am with her.
I owe her so much money she is afraid I’ll run away. All the girls owe
her. They are always in debt to her; that’s the way she keeps them
there.”

We hunted up a livery stable near by. A big, good-natured fat man was in
charge, and we told him we wanted some gentle saddle horses. He looked
at Julia. She had a cocky air, and acted more like a boy than a girl.

“Do you want to ride straddle-legged, gal? If you do, I’ve got some of
them bloomer things.”

Julia did not blush or stammer. “No, I don’t want to ride straddle. What
do you think I am anyway?” She was angry. “You get me a riding habit and
a side saddle and mind your own business.”

He went after the horses.

“We’ll go down to the river, get the ferry, and go over into the woods.
I hope we find some place to eat over there. I am hungry already,” she
said.

I had been too occupied to think of breakfast and was hungry, too, and
suggested that we go across the street and get a bite. When we came back
the horses were ready. The fat man boosted Julia up into her saddle, and
we dashed off like Indians. Our way to the river led past Miss Kate’s.
When we were in front of it Julia pulled up her horse, and we stopped.

“They are all dead to the world in there except Jo, the colored girl.
They won’t get up till four this afternoon. God, what a place! How I
hate to go back there!”

The treacherous April showers came on us when we got into the country
and drove us into a deserted cabin on an abandoned weed-grown farm. I
built a fire in the old fireplace. We found a couple of homemade
three-legged stools in a corner and in a box nailed to the wall there
was the greasiest pack of cards I ever saw. We got a board that we put
on the stools, making a table, and played casino. The roof leaked in a
hundred places, the cabin was full of smoke, the rain beat in from all
sides, and Julia won every game.  She chattered away through it all, and
hoped there would be “a regular cyclone.” Discouraged, I threw the cards
in the fire. We were half wet and watery-eyed from the smoke, the horses
pawed restlessly in the leaky shed behind the cabin. Julia laughed at me
and accused me of being a bad loser. I couldn’t think of anything else,
so I said: “Oh, I’m half starved, and there’s nothing to eat within
miles of here.”

She was just a healthy young animal, always hungry like myself, and the
thought of food, especially when it was so far away, started her to
raving. Nothing would do but we must head for home. The afternoon was
half gone, the rain let up, and the sun shone again. I stamped and beat
out the fire.

Julia climbed upon a tree stump in front of the cabin, where she got
into her riding habit. I brought her horse around and she leaped to the
saddle like an acrobat. The horses, homeward bound, needed no urging. We
let them go as fast as they liked, and in the evening pulled up safely
in front of the livery stable, where Julia insisted on paying the bill.
The fat man reached for the money I proffered, but she snatched it out
of my hand and made him take hers.

“This is on me,” she said, returning my money, “and so is the dinner.
Come on, let’s find a good place to eat.”

The fat man looked at me slyly, started to say something, but changed
his mind. He was afraid of Julia.

Any place is a good place to eat when one is young and hungry, and not
burdened with money. We wasted no time looking, but went into the first
restaurant we came to. Neither did we haggle over the menu card.  Julia
found chicken, and there we stopped. She never seemed to get enough of
it. The dinner was a long time coming; she popped her head out of the
box every minute looking for the busy waiter.

“I wonder what’s happened to him. He has either dropped dead or the
police came and arrested him,” she was saying when he appeared. We fell
on the dinner and devoured it like a couple of hired men.  She had the
waiter bring a cigar. I managed it fairly well.

Her chatter ceased. She sat quietly, elbows on the table, her face
covered with her hands, strong-looking, large, capable hands, but white
and shapely. I smoked and wondered about her. What a partner she would
make for me if she were not a girl! She pushed her chair back, rested
her hands in her lap, and looked up at her bedraggled straw hat on a
hook.  I thought she was ready to go, and got up to get it.

“Don’t touch it, I despise it,” she burst out. “I hate these shoes.” She
put her foot up. “And this dress and every stitch of clothes on my back.
Do you know why? Because every one of them means a different man. Do you
want me to tell you about it; what a tough time I’ve had? But you
wouldn’t understand it. You’re only a kid, like I was a couple of years
ago.”

“Tell me, anyway, Julia.”

Her story, new to me then, was as old as man’s duplicity and woman’s
inherent desire to be loved and protected. Betrayed and deserted,
fearing to face her family, she stole enough of her father’s money to
take her to the city and into a hospital where her baby was born. “And,”
she continued, “I was glad when it died, it was a girl. When I was well
enough to leave the hospital they couldn’t find my clothes.  Cheap as
they were, somebody had taken them. A man can go out into the street
without a hat and coat, kid, but just let a woman try it, even if she
has the nerve, and watch what happens to her. I had no money. The doctor
gave me this dress; that is, he sold it to me and I paid for it the
first time he got drunk. One of the internes traded me these shoes.  He
was just a dirty little beast and didn’t wait to get drunk. Then the
hospital cook got me that hat and some cheap stockings and underclothes.
He happened to be a white man,” she said bitterly. “I suppose I would
have taken them just the same if he had been a negro or a Chinaman.
After the drunken doctor I thought of nothing but suicide, anyway. But I
had to have enough clothes to get through the street and down to the
bridge where I could jump into the river.

“The cook told me he would get me a job in a restaurant downtown and
that stopped me from going to the river. He gave me money for a couple
of night’s lodging, and something to eat, and told me where to go for a
room. He came that night to my room. When he left in the morning his
last words were: ‘I’ll go right out now and get you the job.’

“I waited all day but he never came back. He was a liar; I never saw him
again. When the third night came my money was gone. I was starving, and
the rent was due. I wanted to go down to the river then, but was so
hungry I couldn’t bring myself to do it.”

She had talked furiously, with a storm of bitter words. Now she stopped
and smiled. “Yes, this appetite of mine saved my life. I’ll never die
hungry if I can help it.

“Anyway,” she resumed, “this is the long and the short of it. About nine
o’clock that night the woman of the place came up and wanted the rent. I
told her I was broke, and asked her to stand me off for a few days till
I could get a job or give me something to do so I could earn the rent.

“What do you think she did, kid—the big, man-eater! She took me by the
arm, dragged me out into the hall and pushed me downstairs. She went
back and got my hat, that straw hat hanging up there, and threw it out
on the sidewalk after me.

“A policeman was standing there and saw her do it.  He came up and asked
me what the trouble was about.  Here is where I may get help, I thought,
so I told him I had just left the hospital, that my money was all spent,
and that I had been put out of my room. He asked how old I was. I told
him I was eighteen—that’s two years ago, I’m twenty now. He asked if I
lived here in the city. I told him I lived in the country, but was going
to stay in the city and work.  He wrote something on a card and gave it
to me, saying: ‘I’ll get a hack driver to take you to a hotel. When you
get there give that card to the landlady.’

“The driver took me a few blocks to a place where he stopped, let me
out, and helped me up the steps.  He rang the bell and went away. I gave
the card to a colored girl who opened the door. She came back in a
minute and asked me to come in—and,” she finished wearily, “I’ve been in
Miss Kate’s ever since, kid.

“Miss Kate took me in and dressed me up. She charged me double for my
clothes. I pay her, she pays the milliner. It’s the same with all her
girls.  No girl ever goes into her place unless she is broke and ragged
and sick and hungry. I’ve been there two years, and if I stay there
twenty years I will still be in debt to her. The longer I stay the more
I owe.  Everybody charges us double for what we buy. We have to go to a
certain drug store where we get robbed.  On our days off, Miss Kate
takes us around to her friends in the saloons and restaurants, and they
rob us. We go out with her because we can wear our best clothes and look
good and she shows us off to her customers.

“Once in a while a girl gets so discouraged that she runs out into the
street in her wrapper, but she don’t get out of the block. Some other
landlady’s door is open and she goes in hoping to get fairer treatment
and a chance to save part of the money she earns, but it’s the same old
thing. What the madam don’t get goes to the doctors, druggists, hack
drivers, and messengers. All we get is enough to eat, enough to wear,
and plenty to drink if we’re foolish enough to go that route. God only
knows what becomes of these girls when they get too old and ugly. They
go down and down from one place to another till they finally land in the
street, old, worn out, dissipated and diseased.  No man will have them.
I guess they go to the river or to the hospital.

“Bad as Miss Kate’s is, it is better than having to trade yourself for a
few shabby rags like I did. Miss Kate won’t let drunken men come in and
beat us and abuse us. The men we meet don’t lie to us or deceive us like
they do out in the world. They come in and look us over just like the
butcher used to look at my father’s fat hogs in the fall. We know what
they come for; they know we know. So there’s no lying and deception and
promising you a job. Of course they will steal your money out of the
bureau drawers or your hair brush or a pair of garters or silk
stockings, but you soon learn to protect yourself.  Sometimes, when they
get drunk, they give you a few dollars for yourself, or lose it on the
floor and you put your foot on it. Sometimes a girl gets so in debt that
she steals a few dollars from the men to spend decently when she can get
out by herself.”

“Julia,” I asked, “did you take the hog man’s money?”

“No,” she snapped, bristling. She lied bravely, and I knew it, and
respected her for it, somehow. It was one of those lies you know to be a
lie and yet believe.  The beauty of her lie was that she just let it go
with that plain, short “No!” She did not go into any long explanations
or excuses, or blame it on anybody else.  It was a perfect lie, any way
you look at it.

She lied to me and made me like it. My mind was much disturbed by this
terrible story, so new to me, and a hundred plans came into it for
helping her, but she seemed so independent, confident, and resourceful
that I hesitated.

She struck the table with her fist. “If I ever put my foot out of that
place again I’ll stay out. I was foolish to go out to-day; it’s so much
harder to go back now, after all the fun we’ve had. If I had a change of
clothes I would stay away and try to get a job and start over again.
I’ve got to get out of there while I’m young and strong enough to work.”

“Don’t go back, Julia,” I advised. “Take my money, get a room and a few
clothes. I’ll help you find a job. I know how. I have forty dollars
saved up.  You take that and we will earn more. It’s at my room.  You
wait here till I get it.”

“Sit down,” she said. “Sit down. Why, you poor kid, I wouldn’t take your
money on a bet. I’d rot in Miss Kate’s first. Don’t you know you are the
only human being I’ve met since I left home that hasn’t tried to do me
some kind of dirt? I am going to start in saving every nickel this week,
and if I can find some way to get a few clothes out of there I’ll kiss
Miss Kate’s good-by forever.”

Here was a chance for adventure. “I’ll take your clothes out of there,
Julia,” I could see myself going into Miss Kate’s with my two rusty
pistols and demanding Julia’s clothes. I could see the madam blustering
and protesting, the girls all gathered around, myself standing there,
adamant.

“No excuses, madam, if you please. I want Julia’s clothes and Julia.”

Nothing to it, simple!

“How are you going to do it?” Julia asked. “If you went in there and
tried to take them they would throw you out.”

“Well, how can I do it? Any way you say.”

She thought a long time before she answered: “I could tie them in a
sheet and throw them out the window into the alley, kid, to you.”

This wasn’t heroic enough to suit me, but it sounded practical. I wanted
to help her, so I consented.

“And how are you going to get away if I get your clothes?”

She thought again. “This week, kid, you hunt up some hack driver you can
trust and tell him what you want to do. You can have him in the alley
with his hack. I’ll throw the clothes out. You put them in the hack.
Then I’ll come downstairs, go out through the kitchen, and over the back
fence into the alley. Nobody will pay any attention to me going out in
my parlor wrapper without a hat.

“Next Saturday when you come with your bill I’ll see you in the hall and
tell you what night to come and what time.” Julia was herself again; all
animation, chattering like a sparrow. “It can’t fail, kid.  I can feel
myself out of there already. All you have to do is get a hack driver, a
big, tough one that won’t get scared and run away. That’s all settled,
and it’s time for me to get back to Miss Kate’s. It’s not so hard to go
now.”

Again she insisted on paying the bill. I said good night in front of the
restaurant. She shook hands with me heartily, boyishly; her hand was
hard, firm, and her grip something to inspire confidence.  “Saturday,”
she said, darting away.

I went home with my chest out, my shoulders up in the air, and my head
high. I thought of all my heroes. No, I wouldn’t trade places with any
of them.  Here was real work to do. I must find a hack driver, “a big,
tough one.”

Cocky McAllister was tough enough. A lean, hungry pirate with a balky
eye, who cruised about my neighborhood with his spavined horses and
rickety hack.

I told him what I wanted.

“Never let it be said that I refused to help any young feller get
himself a girl and get up in the world,” he declared. “Say when. I’ll be
on the spot an’ it won’t cost you a dime, either.”

Julia was waiting Saturday when I got to Madam Kate’s.

“Did you get a driver, kid?”

“Yes.”

“Be in the alley to-morrow night at eight.”

I promised to be there. That night I found Cocky and readied him up for
Sunday evening. He showed up on the minute, and we were in the alley by
Madam Kate’s early. Julia was waiting at the window and out came the
bundle. I threw it into the hack. A minute later Cocky snatched her off
the fence, leaving part of her wrapper behind. More of it was streaming
out of the hack door as I slammed it and we drove away.

She wiped the powder and rouge off her face. “No more of that stuff,”
she said.

On the way back to my neighborhood she spotted a “Housekeeping Rooms”
sign in the window of a dingy-looking house. She stopped the hack and
put some money in my hand. “Dash up there, kid, and hire a room,
anything that’s vacant.”

I secured a room quickly enough, came down, and got her. Cocky followed
with the bundle of clothes.  I lit the gas, Cocky threw the clothes on
the bed.

“This is the dirtiest room I ever saw,” said Julia, “but it’s better
than Miss Kate’s, and it’s home to me. Good night and many thinks. I’ll
see you later, kid.”

Back at the cigar store I treated Cocky to a good smoke. “Kid,” he said,
leering at me admiringly, “you’ve got a gold mine; that dame’s a
money-getter.  She’s young and healthy and good for years. Listen, you
put her right out on the street. Make her walk the blocks. She’s workin’
for you then, an’ not the landladies and landlords. Keep her away from
the other women. They’ll wise her up an’ you’ll lose her, or put her
against hop an’ you’ll have a bum on your hands. That’s all, now. Are
you goin’ to start her in to-night? The sooner the better.”

“No, Mac,” I was anxious to get away from him.  “She’s tired and
nervous. I think I’ll let her rest to-night.”

The police got Cocky that night. I never saw him again. He never learned
of my treason in allowing Julia to stay off the streets.

She came into the cigar store a few days later, beaming, happy. “I’ve
got a job, kid, at the Comique jerking beer. Not so good, but better
than Miss Kate’s. It will do till I get a better one. Come down and
watch me work.”

The Comique was an old-time collar-and-elbow variety show long since
supplanted by the modern vaudeville show house. A dozen girls sold
drinks to the patrons on commission. A girl could live on her
commissions, but few of them did. I think Julia managed to do it. I went
down to see her and found her bouncing with energy.

“I’ve made three dollars already to-night, kid, and it’s all mine.”

I waited till she was ready to go home, and walked with her. She had
cleaned up the room till it looked halfway decent. “You don’t have to
go; the place is as much yours as mine,” she said when I was leaving. I
didn’t think about her being a girl; I went home because it was my
habit. If she had been a boy I would have done the same.

I was busy all the time learning to gamble at Tex’s, collecting bills
for the milkman, and taking Julia home after work. There was no mention
of her the next time I went to Madam Singleton’s. She was forgotten,
and they never suspected me.

I was saving my money, hoping some day to get my gray suit, hat, and
trunk. I told Julia of my ambition to have the suit and leather trunk.

“I’ll buy them for you, kid, as soon as I get a few things myself.”

“Never mind that, Julia, I’ll pay for them,” I said, thinking of Cocky
McAllister.

I hung around the Comique every night, waiting for Julia. She knew all
the “actors” and told me about them.

The handsome young man who came out in a green suit did a clog dance and
sang “’Tis a handful of earth” so feelingly worked daytimes in a near-by
chop-house. The two girls with skirts almost to their knees that did the
buck and wing dance sold beer in the boxes. The comedians that beat and
pummeled each other about the stage starved around between engagements
at the local theaters. The strong man, my favorite, turned out to be the
bartender upstairs; he also served as bouncer.

Julia was ambitious to make more money and every night practiced dancing
in hopes that she could some time do a turn at the theater. I served as
her audience, sat around till the small hours, and often fell asleep in
a chair or on the bed. One night we hurried home ahead of a storm and I
was on the bed asleep before she had her supper cooked. She woke me up
tugging at me. “Get up, you poor kid; take your clothes off and go to
bed if you’re that dead for sleep.” She helped me take off my shoes and
I was soon asleep again. She went to bed without waking me, but as I
tossed about in the night I knew she was there and was glad. Once my
body touched hers—it was hot and sticky. I pulled the sheet down between
us and turned away. The next morning as we were walking to the
restaurant for breakfast a heavy hand fell on my shoulder; I turned to
face my father.

My father’s hand was heavy on my shoulder as he pushed me into a
doorway. He looked sad and his stern voice shook. “John, do you know
what you are? You are a pimp.”

Julia never stopped, never looked back, just kept going, which was the
right thing. She probably thought I had been taken by the police. No
good in her getting arrested, too.

Although for years I kept a sharp eye out, I never saw her again; that
is, to know her. Of course the gray-haired old lady that sat next me in
the car this morning might have been Julia. But anyway, if she is alive
and this meets her eye, I want her to know I never doubted for a minute
that she stayed away from the life she left behind at Madam Singleton’s.

Later, when I went to her room, it was vacant.  The man in charge told
me a strange, bearded man with a policeman called on her—my father, no
doubt—after which she packed up and left without a word.

I called at the theater and inquired, but they had forgotten her.




CHAPTER VI


As we walked to our boarding house I told my father the whole story of
my job in the cigar store, my collecting for the milkman, my arrest, and
our rescue of Julia. He listened without comment, and when I was done,
said: “Well, John, you’ll be what you’ll be, and I cannot help or hinder
you. Go back to your job in the morning if you like.”

Those were his last words to me. They were kind, and I have always
remembered them and their ring of fatality. I never saw him again. I
learned later that he lived out his life orderly and died decently.  He
went away the next day, and when he returned I was far away, westbound
in search of adventure.

I was tired of Tex and his tribe and their smoky back room and cheap
cheating. I was sick of the sight of the crabby widow at the boarding
house. It was springtime. Sundown found me miles away on a country road,
walking westward. Yes, I was going in the right direction. There was the
sun going down away off in front of me. Darkness was coming on, but it
did not strike me as unusual that I had no supper or no room for the
night.

I came to a bridge and stopped when I heard voices below. I looked over
the side and a voice came up: “Come on down, kid. Don’t be leary, we’re
only a couple of harmless bindle stiffs.”

I picked my way down to the level place beside the small creek where
they were. One of them was unrolling a “bindle” of blankets, the other
was washing a large tin can in the creek.

“Throw out your feet, kid, and get some wood before it gets too dark.
We’ll have a fire and a can of Java, anyway.”

Wood was plentiful. I soon returned with an armful. The other bum came
up with the can from the creek and began breaking up some twigs to start
the fire. He barely looked at me. “Take a look around the jungle, kid,
and see if you can find a pan,” he ordered.

“What in hell do you want a pan for?” asked the one that sent me after
wood. “Are you going to fry some water?” The other was on his hands and
knees blowing up the weak fire. He stood up and looked at the speaker
with a most superior air. “Not so fast, brother, not so fast. I’ve got a
gump in my bindle.”

He unrolled his blankets and produced a live chicken, big and fat.

The other bum was humbled. “A gump!” he muttered, “and me carrying a
fryin’ pan with me for the last week.” He dived into his bindle and got
the pan.

The owner of the chicken took the pan and held it between his eye and
the fire looking for holes in it.  “It’ll do,” he said. “More wood,
kid,” they both ordered.

We were three strangers well met under the bridge; one had a chicken,
one coffee and a stale loaf of bread. I had nimble legs and gathered the
firewood.

The gump was picked, cleaned, unjointed, and put in the pan with
neatness and despatch that would have done credit to any chef. The
coffee boiled fragrantly in the tin can. The owner of the stale loaf
hacked it into three equal parts with his strong pocketknife, while the
chicken man deftly turned sections of the bird with a sharp-pointed
stick.

“This is a pretty snide jungle,” he said, “no cans.  Throw your feet,
kid, and get some cans for the Java.”

I scurried around and was lucky to find one small can in the dark. The
cook inspected it. “Go down and wash it, bring it back half full of
water an’ I’ll boil it out.”

I washed the can and brought it back. The chicken and coffee were cooked
and cooling near the fire. The cook scalded out the small can and filled
it with coffee.  He held out the pan of chicken to the other bum and
then to me, helping himself to a piece last. The small can of coffee was
now cool enough to drink, and was handed around in the same order. The
first bum took several swallows and passed it to me. I handed it to the
cook without drinking any. He looked at me for the first time.

“Say, brat, listen. If you was some kind of a rank dingbat you wouldn’t
have been invited down here.  Don’t think because you couldn’t hustle a
can that you ain’t entitled to your coffee.”

“You’re right at that, Jack,” said the bum that furnished the coffee.
“Go ahead, kid.”

I drank my coffee and passed the can along. We ate in silence. The
chicken and bread soon disappeared. My companions lit up their pipes and
smoked while we finished the coffee.

I was learning fast. I took the frying pan, filled it with water, and
put it on the fire, without waiting for orders. When the water boiled I
washed it at the creek, scrubbed it with sand, and returned it to the
owner.

“Where you from, kid?”

“The city,” I answered.

“How long you been on the road?”

“This is my first day.”

“Got any people?”

“No, they are all dead.”

“Where you goin’?”

“Oh, just west, anywhere, everywhere.”

“Got any pennies?”

“No pennies. I’ve got a couple of dollars.” I looked from one to the
other. “Do you want any of it, either of you?”

“No,” from both of them. “But,” said the cook, “if we was in the city
I’d take fifty cents of it purty pronto and get myself a four-bit
micky.”

“A what?” I asked, mystified.

“A four-bit micky, a fifty-cent bottle of alcohol—Dr. Hall, white line,”
he translated in disgust. “If you’re goin’ west you better learn to talk
west.”

“Yes,” said the other, “and ‘pennies’ don’t mean pennies. It means
money, on the road.”

They didn’t talk much between themselves; they had probably compared
notes before I arrived at the bridge. They were both past fifty, wore
clean overalls, substantial shoes, and clean-looking blue shirts. A
month later I could have classified them correctly as professional bums,
too old to ride the trains, satisfied to throw their feet along the
“star routes,” or country roads, where food was seldom refused, and to
sleep in their bindles, or blankets, under the stars.

It was time to “flop.” They took off their shoes and coats. The shoes
were neatly placed together on a level spot; the coat was folded and
placed on top of them making a fair pillow, and at the same time
protecting them from theft. Each of them threw me a piece of blanket. I
made a pillow of my coat and shoes, rolled up in the blankets, and was
soon asleep.

A farmer’s team crossing the bridge woke us at daylight. I got up at
once, cold and sore from the hard ground, and made a fire. The other two
crawled out of their blankets and went down to the creek to wash. I
followed them. They both had soap wrapped in paper. One of them gave me
his piece. I washed and returned it. He placed it on a rock till it was
dry, then wrapped it up and put it in his coat pocket.  They also had
pocket combs and small round mirrors.

We went back to the fire and discussed breakfast.  “Nothing but Java,”
said the bum that had the coffee.

“I’ll go to the farmhouse,” I volunteered, “and buy something.”

“Nix, nix,” said one; “buy nothin’,” said the other, “it’s you kind of
cats that make it tough on us, buyin’ chuck. They begin to expect money.
You go up to that house,” pointing to a place on a small rise, about
fifteen minutes’ walk, “and tell the woman you and two other kids run
away from home in the city three days ago and you ain’t had nothin’ but
a head of cabbage that fell off a farmer’s wagon between youse since you
left. Tell her you are on your way back home and the other two kids are
down by the bridge so hungry they can’t walk. On your way up there git a
phony name and street number ready in case she asks you questions.
She’ll give you a sit-down for yourself, chances are, but bring back a
‘lump’ for us. You’re a decent-lookin’ kid; she might git worked up
about your troubles and ask a lot of dam’ fool questions.  Cut her off.
Tell her you’re ashamed to be settin’ there wasting time and the other
boys starvin’ under the bridge.”

Before I got to the house a couple of dogs dashed out, barking savagely.
A healthy, matronly woman came out and quieted them, looking at me
inquiringly.  I told her myself and two boy friends, runaways from home,
were hungry and I wanted some food, that I would be glad to pay her for
anything she could spare, and if she would wrap it up I would hurry down
to the bridge with it, where my chums were waiting.

“Yes,” she said kindly, “come in. I haven’t much here, but maybe I can
find enough.” She gave me a seat outside near the kitchen door, where I
waited and made friends with the dogs. In no time she came out with a
large parcel, and refused the money I offered. I thanked her and went
down to the bridge with my “lump.”

The bums had coffee boiling. We found enough tin cans to drink from and
opened the parcel. It contained cold, fried chicken, cold biscuits, and
half a pie.

“You’re a good connecter, kid; sure you didn’t pay for this?” one of
them said.

“No, and I didn’t have to answer any questions.  It was easy except for
the dogs.”

“Don’t let dogs worry you, kid; they’re cowards.  I ought to know, I’ve
been battlin’ ’em twenty years. They’ll bite you if you turn your back
or run away, or if there’s a pack of ’em they’ll pull you down. If you
get up against a hostile dog, rush him and he’ll weaken. I never got bit
but once an’ that was in the town of Pueblo. I was just after gettin’ a
six months’ floater out of Denver an’ went down to Pueblo to do a little
D.D.ing with lavender for myself.  I got myself a bunch of lavender and
a ducat.”

The other bum laughed, his mouth full of chicken.  “You’re talkin’
Chinook to that kid. What does he know about the D.D. and lavender and
ducats.”

“You’re right,” I said. “I don’t know what he is talking about.” I was
anxious to learn, but didn’t like to ask questions.

“Well, it’s this way,” he went on. “I was dummyin’ up, see? Imitatin’ a
deaf an’ dumb man. D.D.ing, see? You surely know what lavender is—stuff
women put on clothes. You put about a spoonful in a small envelope.
You’ve got a pocketful of the envelopes ready when you go out to make
your ‘plunge.’ Then you get your ducat, see? That’s the main thing. I
got a bartender to write it for me on the back of a lawyer’s card. When
the women opens the door you slip her your ducat and she reads:

    ‘I am deaf and dumb. I got hurt by a street car and just came
    out of the county hospital.  I am trying to get seven dollars
    to pay my fare home to Cheyenne. Please take a parcel of
    lavender and give what you can.’

Sometimes they take your lavender an’ sometimes they don’t, but they
generally give up something, an’ they can’t ask you a lot of questions,
and if a copper grabs you you’ve got an out. You ain’t exactly beggin’.

“As I was sayin’ about dogs. I was battering the privates, see? Private
houses. A woman had just slipped me a dime an’ was standin’ in the front
door watchin’ to see that I got off the premises. I’m about halfway to
the gate when I heard a dog snarlin’, an’ comin’ up behind me. I’m D.D.,
see, an’ don’t want to round on the damn dog an’ give myself a bawl-out
in front of the woman, so I stand my ground figgerin’ she’ll stop him.
The next thing I know he’s got half my pants leg ripped off an’ a chunk
out of one of my shins. Anyway, I run him under the house. The woman
took me in an’ fixed me up with arnica an’ a bandage. Then she gets me a
good suit of her old man’s clothes, gives me two dollars, and holds the
dog under the house till I get out the front gate.  That’s dogs for
you,” he finished, “an’ women.”

I had a question, but the other bum asked it for me.  “What do you do if
you bump into a natural dummy when you’re D.D.ing?”

“Well,” said the dog expert, “I never bumped into one, but if I did I
suppose I’d do what everybody else does when they’re wrong an’ get
caught at it. I’d get mad an’ cuss hell out of ’em.”

Breakfast over, the bums shaved. Both had razors.  All bums carry razors
for shaving, fighting, or cutting through a sleeper’s clothing to get
into his pocket. One of them had a big silk handkerchief that he
stropped his razor on, the other used his belt. They heated water in a
tin can, lathered their hands, and rubbed it on their faces. One used
his mirror, the other used none. After shaving they dried their blades
carefully and secreted them about their persons. Blankets were rolled
up, and the bums were ready to take the road.  The D.D. man was going
into the city for a few days.  “So long.” He scrambled up the bank to
the road.

The other was traveling in my direction and volunteered to direct me to
a junction where I could make a westbound train.

“You’re welcome to travel with me, kid, if you want to jungle-up for a
month or two,” my companion said. “The fruit will be gettin’ ripe soon,
and there’ll be green corn and new spuds and the gumps are fat already.
I promise myself some famous mulligans around these parts.”

Many boys would have jumped at this chance, but I declined. Maybe it was
a dislike for begging, or ambition, or my imagination pulling me
westward.  I don’t know; but it wasn’t the hardships, I’m sure.  At the
junction we parted.

“So long, kid. May see you out West next fall when I make the poultice
route.”

“What’s that?” I asked.

“That’s southern Utah, kid, the land of milk and honey. You’re always
sure of a big pan of milk and a fresh loaf of home bread—the poultice
route, see?  So long.”

---

A long, heavy westbound freight train was slowly pulling out when I got
to the railroad yards. A car of lumber, clean and white, piled halfway
to the roof, the door invitingly open, came along. Nimbly I swung up and
in.

Inside the car I looked about for a place to secrete myself. The lumber
was about six feet shorter than the car, which left a large space at one
end. I dropped down into it, took off my coat, and stretched out on the
floor, feeling sure of a long ride. No brakeman would crawl over that
pile of lumber even if he knew there was a hiding place at one end.

Along in the afternoon, after one of the many stops, I heard a
scrambling above and a young fellow about my own age dropped lightly
down beside me.  I had been in the car so long that the half light was
enough. I saw he was ragged and frightfully dirty, road dirt—coal smoke,
cinders, ashes, grease. His coat, too large for the thin frame, was full
of holes and its lining hung in tatters. His trousers were greasy and
full of hot-cinder holes. His calico shirt was open in front, his skin
was dirty. He was sharp-eyed and thin-faced. He eyed me wolfishly.

“How long you been here?”

“All day.”

“Where you headin’ for?”

“Denver.”

“Got a smoke?”

“No.”

He dug a dirty newspaper out of his back pocket, neatly tore a piece off
the border, tearing it downward with the grain, till he had a piece the
size of a cigarette paper. A search of his coat pocket yielded a cigar
snipe, which he crushed in his hand and then rolled up in the paper he
had held in his mouth.

“Got a match?”

“No.”

He looked at me in disgust, dug up one of his own, and lit up. The smell
of his cigarette was fierce. He now took off his shoes. One of them was
laced with dirty white string. He had no socks, his feet were grimy and
smelled. His coat came off next; with it and his shoes he made a pillow
and stretched out on the floor.

“Won’t the brakeman smell that smoke?” I asked.

“To hell with him an’ you,” and he spoke no more.  Finishing his smoke,
he adjusted his pillow and went to sleep. I rolled my coat up, made a
pillow, and dozed. I was afraid he would steal my shoes, so I left them
on.

Something woke me in the evening. I think it was the lumber shifting.
The train was on a down grade, the car creaking and rocking. We were in
the front end. Suddenly my companion jumped to his feet. He looked
scared, started to crawl up on top of the lumber. He was too late. There
was a grinding noise, and a crash. About four feet of the top of the
lumber slid forward against the front end of the car and he was crushed,
flattened between. I was a prisoner below, unhurt. This shifting of the
lumber cut off the light from the open side door, but its weight against
the end of the car opened up some cracks and I was soon able to see
about me dimly. The boy had died instantly. His body, from the waist up,
was flattened between the lumber and front end of the car. His legs
dangled below, down where I was imprisoned, with each movement of the
car, like the legs of a scarecrow in the wind.

I can’t remember that I was shocked or frightened, but I do know that as
soon as I found I was imprisoned in that car I got hungry. I hadn’t
eaten since morning and was hungry before the thing happened. But then I
knew I could get out and eat at any stop. Now I couldn’t, and my hunger
became unbearable.

The place I was in was large as ever, except in height. The shifting of
the lumber had reduced that to about three feet. I couldn’t stand up. I
was in no danger. The lumber could not shift at the bottom, the weight
of that above was too heavy. I had a strong pocketknife, and went to
work on the side of the car near the end. The boarding was thin,
weather-rotten, and old. In a couple of hours I had cut almost through
one end of three boards. My hands were blistered. I sat down and waited
till I heard the whistle blow for a town.

As the train went into the yards I kicked the boards loose at the top
where they were cut, and pulled them away from below where they were
nailed. This gave me a hole large enough to crawl out of, which I did,
feet first, pulling my coat after, when she stopped. Up on the main
street I learned I was in Dodge City, Kansas, a town at that time
largely given over to gambling, fighting, and whisky drinking. I wasn’t
interested in any of those amusements then. I got something to eat and
went to a cheap room for the night.  Tired out, I slept till noon the
next day. Then I went down to the yards to look for another train out.
Near the depot I met a character who looked like a bum.  He gave me a
sharp look.

“Goin’ down in the yards, young feller?”

“Yes, why?”

“Better wait till night if you want to make a train.  The railroad bull
is hostile. They found a bum dead in a car of lumber this morning, and
they had to tear the end of the car off to get his body out. He must
have been an awful gay cat to get into the end of a carload of planed
lumber. It’s suicide.”

I went back uptown and into a lunch counter. The waiter was idle and
talkative.

“Traveling?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“Which way?”

“Denver.”

“Beating it?”

“Yes.”

“Listen here, it’ll take you three or four days to make Denver that way.
You’ll ruin your clothes and maybe get grabbed off a train and handed
thirty days at Colorado Springs—big chain gang there—they’re cleaning up
the streets. If you can dig up five dollars I’ll give you a card to a
porter on the Overland to-night. Give him the five and he’ll do the
rest.”

“Thanks, I’ll try it.”

I met the train and the porter who took the card and my five dollars,
stowed me away in the linen closet, and locked the door. I was almost
suffocated. Once in the night he opened the closet. “How you makin’ out,
buddy?”

“All right,” I said, and the door was locked again.  Next morning he
gave me a piece of steak between slices of bread, and a bottle of
coffee. After that I felt better and dozed in a cramped, sitting
position in a corner.

That afternoon at Denver I was released, happy, hungry, cramped, and
tired. I rented a cheap room for a week, went to a barber shop, and had
a bath.  I thought twenty-five cents for a bath a rank waste of money
and decided to find a swimming hole. In a few days I found one.

There was a sort of camp for bums on the river bank under some trees.
They had their fires there, and cans for boiling coffee. They used to
lie around, washing and boiling their clothes, and swimming. They stole
chickens around the neighborhood and anything else they could get.

One afternoon I was in swimming, when suddenly there was an alarm and
everybody ran. I didn’t pay any attention to it at first; then I got out
of the water and ran for my clothes. I had just about got them on when
the police arrived and grabbed me.

They put me into the patrol wagon. I was the only one they got. Later
they picked up one or two others around in the woods, and took us all
down to the jail.  I was scared half to death.

They put us all in one big room with a lot of other bums they’d picked
up. The police had had a general order to clean up the town.

In the morning they took us all up to court. It was the first time I had
been in court. We were all charged with vagrancy. When my name was
called, I protested. I said, “Judge, you can’t call me a vagrant.  I
have twenty dollars down in the jail office.”

He looked at me as coldly and impersonally as if I had been a dish of
parsnips. “Fifteen days on the chain gang. Next case.”




CHAPTER VII


I was taken downstairs and locked in a cell; I saw no more of the “bull
pen” where I spent the night.  My cellmate was a handsome, smiling young
fellow about twenty-two or twenty-three. He looked like a country boy,
rugged, red-cheeked, blue-eyed, sandy-haired. He seemed to be well
acquainted in the jail.

Some one sang out, “Who’s the fresh fish, ‘Smiler’?”

“Another vag,” he answered. “Fifteen days.”

I told him about my case at once. I felt outraged.

“Forget it, kid. Your fifteen days will be in before your name’s dry on
the commitment. They won’t put you on the gang. You’ll get a trusty job.
I’m just finishing ten days, haven’t been out of this cell, goin’ out
this afternoon and out of this man’s town, too,” he smiled. “Let’s eat.
You’ve got money in the office.  I’ll send for a messenger.”

“All right,” I said, “do it.”

A trusty took my name and our orders. Smiler ordered tobacco and papers
also. A messenger came in an hour with two meals and the “makings” of
smokes. I signed my name on the check and he was paid at the office.
After we ate, Smiler sang songs, danced, or stood at the door waiting to
be released.

“I’m going West, kid; hope I see you on the road so I can return that
feed,” he said, when the trusty came to release him.

I liked “The Smiler” and wished I could be with him. In the morning
coffee and stale bread were served in the cells. Fifteen minutes later
there was a banging of doors. Some one shouted “Chain gang.” My door was
opened.

“Outside, kid,” said a trusty.

I followed other prisoners down the corridor to a big, open room where
they washed up in running water at a sink and dried themselves with
handkerchiefs.  The trusty came with my hat.

“You won’t need your coat, kid. I’ll look out for it.”

An officer opened a door to the street and stood inside; another was
outside; the chain gang filed out and climbed into an open wagon with
seats on each side facing each other. A crowd of curious men and boys
stood around the wagon. When my turn came, instead of getting into the
wagon I dashed down the street, instinctively, like a wild animal. The
guards didn’t chase me for fear the others would escape. The crowd
shouted and cheered me on. I was free.

There was nothing in my room. I didn’t go near it. I had no money, and
hunger seized me at once.  I walked out of town, walked all day and till
dark, when I found myself exhausted at a bums’ camp twenty miles away,
on the outskirts of a small town.  Confidently I walked up to the fire.
I was one of them.  I had escaped; I was hungry; I was ready for
anything; I belonged around the fire. I heard an exclamation. A form
rose up from the fireside and grabbed me with both hands. It was Smiler.

“That’s doin’ time, kid, what! Did you beat it?  Where’s your coat?”

“Yes. My coat’s in the jail.”

“Take a rest for an hour, and we’ll go up to the burg. I’ll get you
one.”

On our way into the town he explained. “There’ll be a train through here
about ten o’clock, kid; I’ll kick in the first private house that looks
good. We’ll surely find a coat and maybe a few dollars and something to
eat if we have time.”

He looked about sharply at the houses. Across the street we heard a door
slam. A woman and man came out the front gate, the cottage was dark. We
walked around the block and back to the cottage.  Smiler walked
confidently in the front gate, I followed.  He rang the doorbell, no
answer. We went around to the back where he found a kitchen window open,
climbed through, and unlocked the door for me.

“Look around for some chuck, kid, and stay right there till I come
back.” He disappeared. In a minute or two I could see about me, and
explored the pantry. I found bread and meat and tied them in a cloth.

Smiler returned from the front carrying a bundle of clothes, and we went
out. I found a coat that fitted passably. We left the balance, and
departed unseen.

The train was pulling in and we made a run to the water tank where it
had to stop, and by the time we found a car we could get into it was
pulling out.

The lunch was spread out on a paper and quickly disappeared. Smiler had
some cheap jewelry, an old silver watch, and a few dollars in cash. He
divided the money, and after inspecting the other plunder threw it out
the car door. “That junk would get us five years, kid, if we got grabbed
with it, and it ain’t worth two dollars.”

This adventure fascinated me. I gave no thought to the burglary. It
seemed right that I should have a coat and food. My money was behind in
the jail. I couldn’t buy them. I had stolen them. Somehow I felt
satisfied, as if I had got even with somebody.

“How do you like this racket, kid?” Smiler asked as we rolled up our
coats for pillows.

“It’s great. How long have you been doing it?”

“Oh, a couple of years. Ever since the coppers run me out of my home
town, Detroit. That was a snide little caper we cut back there and I
wouldn’t have touched it only you had to have a coat. How would you like
to be a prowler, kid?”

I liked him, always smiling, for his ready help when I needed it and his
companionable ways.

“I think I would like it; it’s exciting.”

“All right, kid. When we get to Salt Lake I’ll show you the real thing.”

“Good,” I said. “How long will it take us to make Salt Lake?”

“About a week at this rate.”

“Let’s ride the passenger trains,” I said, anxious to take my first
lessons in burglary.

“We’ll get a passenger train out of Cheyenne, kid, if we can duck Jeff
Carr,” said Smiler. “Never heard of him? He’s a railroad bull and he’s
‘bum simple’—simple-minded on the subject of killing bums. If you run
he’ll shoot you; if you stand he’ll get you six months, and he’d rather
have you run.”

I learned all about Carr later, and his feud with the bums. They made
many efforts to kill him, but never succeeded. He was later put in
charge of the railroad’s train-robber detail, but he never killed any
train robbers and the bums rambled through Cheyenne in peace.

We got a train out without falling foul of the murderous Carr and rode
the baggage into a division point where there was a twenty-minute stop
for dinner.  Looking around for a place to get coffee, we passed a
jewelry store. The jeweler was working at his bench in front. When we
got to the alley, Smiler said: “We’ll make that tray of watches in the
window, kid.  You get a handful of rocks, go around to the back, and
throw them against the jeweler’s door till he opens it. When he does,
I’ll make the front. Don’t throw them too hard and scare him.
Easy—just enough to make him curious.”

I followed instructions and was preparing to throw the fourth rock when
the door opened. The jeweler stepped out and took a good look around. I
walked down the alley to the street, and soon caught up with Smiler, who
was stepping away briskly.

“We’ve got to plant this junk, kid. We can’t take chances luggin’ it
around.”

We were in the yards now and Smiler was looking at the cars curiously as
we passed between them. He stopped beside a car of coal and looked at
the card tacked on it. “Billed to Butte, Montana,” he said, “this’ll
do.” He tied the watches, which he took from his coat pocket, in a big
handkerchief. We climbed up on the car and the parcel was planted in
one corner and plenty of coal put back on top of it. On the ground
again, Smiler tore off a corner of the destination card. “Don’t forget
that, kid; in case anything happens to me you’ll know this car.”

This was all accomplished in less than twenty minutes, and we had plenty
of time to catch our passenger train, which we did, leaving our plunder
behind but sure to follow.

“He may not miss that junk till he goes to close up, kid, or he may have
missed it already. Anyway we’ll sure be stuck up and frisked at
Evanston. All we have to do is tell the truth, say we rode this rattler
out of Cheyenne and never left the yards at Rock Springs. And they won’t
hold us. They can’t figure that we could touch that joint and go out on
the same train. We’ll stop at Evanston anyway and wait for our coal car.
Then, instead of going to Salt Lake, we’ll ride the freight over the
cut-off to Pocatello and I’ll get the coin on that junk in an hour from
Mary.”

“Who’s Mary?” I asked.

“Wait till you see her, to-morrow. She’ll buy anything from a barrel of
whisky to a baby carriage.”

It was a warm night, and riding the front end of the baggage was
pleasant enough. “If the bulls grab us off, kid, you say nothing; I’ll
talk and tell them who we are and where we’re going. You listen, that’s
all.

“Say,” he said suddenly, “take off that coat and let me look at it.” He
went over it closely by the light from the engine. It was tailor-made,
and he found the owner’s name on a piece of white cloth sewed in the
inside pocket. He ripped it out, and I put the coat on.

“You never can be too careful, kid. We ought to have looked at that
before. If Jeff Carr had picked us up at Cheyenne you might have been
charged with that lousy burglary by now.”

How could a boy help admiring such wisdom? I was flattered to be taken
up by one so experienced, so confident and active about his work, and
withal, so carefree, happy, and smiling.

We were not molested at Evanston, where we got off and waited for our
freight train. It came along next day, and that night we dropped off it
at Pocatello, Idaho.

Pocatello, at that time, was just a small railroad town. A famous
stopping-off place for the bums bound East, West, North and South. There
was a grand jungle by a small, clean river where they boiled up their
vermined clothes, or “rags” as they are always called, cooked their
mulligans, or, if enough bums got together, held a “convention.” These
conventions, like many others, were merely an excuse for a big drunk.
Sometimes they would end in a killing, or some drunken bum would fall in
the fire and get burned to death, after which they would silently steal
away.  Oftener, the convention lasted till there was no more money for
alcohol, the bums’ favorite drink. The bums then began “pestering the
natives” by begging and stealing till the whole town got sore.

The town marshal would then appear with a posse armed with “saps,” which
is short for saplings, young trees. He stood guard with a shotgun, while
the posse fell upon the convention and “sapped up” on those therein
assembled and ran them down the railroad track and out of town.

We found our junk without trouble, and hastened to “Mary’s.”

If I knew more of composition and writing and talking I might do justice
to Mary, the fence, and friend of bums and thieves.

It’s an injustice to the memory of Mary, or, as she was lovingly called
by the bums, “Salt Chunk Mary,” to try to crowd her into a few
paragraphs or even a chapter. She should have a book.

“Did you eat yet?” was the first thing you heard after entering her
house. “I have a pot of beans on the stove and a fine chunk of salt pork
in them.” She invariably produced the beans and “fine chunk of salt
pork” and always ate as heartily of them as any of her famished guests.

Her principal business was selling wine, women, and song to the railroad
men and gamblers. She ruled her half dozen “girls” with a heavy hand.
Her house on the outskirts of the town was a dingy, old two-story frame
building with a couple of rooms added to one side of it where she lived
and received her friends from the road.

Smiler knew her and we were welcome. The feed of beans and salt pork was
spread for us. She locked the door and, while we ate, this most unusual
woman estimated the value of our loot, spread out on one end of the
oilcloth-covered kitchen table where we sat.

Salt Chunk Mary put no acids on the watches, nor pried into the works.
She “hefted” the yellow ones with a practiced hand and glanced but once
at the white ones.

I surveyed her as I ate. She was about forty years of age, hard-faced
and heavy-handed. Her hair was the color of a sunburned brick, and her
small blue eyes glinted like ice under a March sun. She could say “no”
quicker than any woman I ever knew, and none of them ever meant “yes.”

She went into the adjoining room and returned with a roll of bills.
“Four hundred dollars, Smiler.”

“Good! Give us small bills, Mary.”

He divided the money equally between us and we got up to go.

“Let’s go in and buy a few bottles of beer for the girls, kid, just by
the way of no harm.”

“No, don’t drag that kid in there—and here’s something else, listen,”
said this plain, blunt woman to Smiler. “I guess that kid is all right
or he wouldn’t be with you. If I’m grabbed with this junk I’ll rot in
jail before I put the finger on you, and if either of you gets grabbed
(she was looking at me), and thinks he can get a light jolt by turning
me in, he’s wrong.  I’ll throw it in the river, and he can rot in jail.”

We got a room to rest up, and before going to sleep decided that Salt
Lake was too small for us. San Francisco was better. Smiler had never
been there, and was as anxious to see it as I. Buying tickets was
throwing money away. So we “beat it” down to Ogden and over the Southern
Pacific, riding the front end of passenger trains at night, making long
jumps, avoiding bums’ camps, paying for our meals, and stealing nothing.
We got into Sacramento without mishap, rested up a couple of days, and
journeyed along toward “the city.” We got “ditched” off our train at
Port Costa, and crawled into a hay car for the night.  There were a
couple of bums in the car already, and more came in later and flopped.

Early next morning we were aroused by a pounding on the side of the car.
“Come on out of there!” shouted a man with his head in the door, “yez
are all pinched.” We hit the ground, eight of us in all, young and old,
large and small. Two men were outside, carrying shortened billiard cues.

“March!” one of them ordered.

One of the bums started to march and the rest followed. He seemed to
know just what to do and where to go. A short walk across the tracks
brought us up in front of a big barnlike house with a hotel sign and
broad steps in front. The bum led us straight up the steps and into a
barroom, where he stood up against the wall opposite the bar. We did the
same.  A stout, grayish, red-faced man with a very positive air was busy
serving drinks. He paused and spoke to one of our captors:

“What have you there, Mike?”

“Eight bums, judge.”

He served another round of drinks and turned to us again.

“Are you guilty or not guilty?”

The big bum that led us in immediately answered: “We’re all guilty,
judge, an’ hungry.”

The judge—and he was no less person than Judge Casey, famous and
celebrated in song and story for his speedy trials and the human quality
of his justice—waved a short, hairy, muscular arm toward the dining
room.

“Feed them first, Mike.”

We followed our leader into the dining room and all sat at one big table
where we had a substantial breakfast. When the last bum had his fill, we
marched back to the barroom and lined up against the wall again.

“All ready, judge,” said Mike.

The judge stopped dealing drinks and pronounced sentence. His voice
sounded tired, weary; there was a note of kindness in it.

“Oh, well, Mike, lave the big bums take tin days, and the little bums
five.”

He turned to his work. The big bum now led us out and to a near-by box
car that served as a calaboose.  One side door was nailed up and both
end doors fastened outside. We crawled in and the other side door was
shut and padlocked on the outside.

Smiler sat down in the car and laughed. “What’s next, I wonder, kid?”

Some one answered out of the darkness: “They’ll hook this box car on to
the first freight and haul us over to Martinez, the county seat, an’
slough us in the county jail.”

I had told Smiler about cutting myself out of the car when my companion
was killed.

“Better get busy with your ‘shive,’ kid.” I started cutting on the side
opposite the boarding house. The bum that pleaded guilty for all of us
saw what I was doing and protested. “Hey, kid, lay off o’ that. You want
to get us all six months, destroyin’ railroad property?”

Smiler was on him like a tiger and cuffed him around till he whined. “Go
over in that corner and lie down, you greasy, big gay cat, or I’ll cut
your tail off.” The bum sat down and stayed quiet. In an hour we kicked
the boards out.

“You first, kid.”

I dropped out and Smiler followed. As we dodged across the yards I
looked back. Two more bums had wriggled out. The other four elected to
stay in the car, too lazy to run away.

We hid all day under a warehouse and at dark rode a freight into Oakland
where we got the ferry. We bought new clothes, rented a room, and got
cleaned up.  San Francisco fascinated us. We spent days on the water
front watching the ships and sailors, or at the Cliff House where I
first saw the ocean, and in the park. Our nights were spent about the
“Coast,” Broadway and Pacific Street, at Bottle Koenig’s or the Bella
Union or downtown at Pete Dorsey’s and other dance halls.

Gambling was open everywhere; we experimented and lost. We wasted our
money around the shows, dance halls, and hop joints, which were open and
unmolested by the police. In a month we were almost broke, and ready for
the road. Salt Lake was decided upon where Smiler had something special
in view.

An uneventful week on the road put us into Salt Lake City.

Then swiftly came the tragic night that separated us forever—I to jail
and the kindly, lovable Smiler to his grave.




CHAPTER VIII


There was a legend on the road that the Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake
City was a veritable storehouse of gold, silver, and precious stones and
it was this that lured Smiler back to that city. At that time a high
adobe wall surrounded the block on which stood the Tabernacle and the
then unfinished Mormon Temple. We looked it over for several days and
nights but could get nothing tangible to work on. Sunday we attended
services and the plate was to be seen, silver and gold; more than we
could carry away if we got it. At last we decided to go over the wall
and give the place a good reconnaissance. If it looked feasible we could
get a couple of other idle burglars and give it a thorough looting.

On top of the wall we pulled up our light ladder and placed it inside.
Smiler went down first. I barely had my feet off the ladder when a dozen
men rose up out of the shrubbery armed with shotguns, and surrounded us.
We stood still by the wall. One of them spoke, sternly, evenly: “Go back
over that wall.”

Little we knew the Mormons. We went up the ladder, pulled it up, and
went down and away.

When Smiler’s good humor returned he held up his hand. “Kid, I’ll never
try to rob another Mormon.  I’ll go to work first.”

The next day we went into a small gambling house where we hung out to
read the papers. We sat at a table near the big safe in a corner of the
room. A man in overalls was taking the lock apart. The place had changed
hands a few days before and the new proprietors were having the numbers
of the combination changed. When the mechanic finished his work he wrote
some numbers on two slips of paper. These he threw on the floor beside
his tools and went back to the bar for a drink. Smiler stooped, picked
up the slips, looked at them closely, and threw them back on the floor.

Outside, he said: “We’ve got the combination of that box, kid. Those two
pieces of paper are for the new proprietors, their new combination.”

Neither one of us knew enough about safes to feel sure of opening one
even when we had the numbers.  Smiler knew a chap doing time in the
penitentiary who knew all about safes. The “stir” was only a mile out of
the city and we decided to go up and get some expert advice.

Next day we visited the expert at the “stir,” who gladly gave us
instructions and declared himself in with any money we got.

That night Smiler opened the box as easily as if it belonged to him and
locked it again. We got but a few hundred dollars where we expected
several thousands. The new owners had no bankroll, just opened up on a
shoestring, hoping to get off lucky and win. The next morning they
accused each other of the theft, almost fought with pistols, and
dissolved partnership, calling each other thieves.

The money was split three ways. The expert at the “stir” took his bit
with bad grace, intimating that we got more than we were dividing, and
that we were thieves. As we were leaving, Smiler said: “Good-by,
‘Shorty.’ Everything’s all right now, ain’t it?”

“Oh, sure,” he grouched. “Everything’s all right—just like Denmark.”

“Kid, we’ll go up to that joint and give them a chance to win their
money back,” said Smiler. “I feel lucky.”

We went up, but they were closed and we had to go elsewhere to gamble.
The habit had fastened on him.  He became a fiend for gambling. When his
money was gone I let him play mine in, and he kept us broke.  In a few
days the money from our last venture was gone, and we were sparring
about for more.

The oldest and commonest system of the house burglar in locating money
and jewelry is to stand about theaters, cafés, and the better shops,
watching their patrons and following them home if they display wealth.
Smiler and I followed a woman and man to their home one night from the
theater. The woman wore enough diamonds to stun any thief or pawnbroker.
They went into a well-kept, two-story house, back in a big yard full of
trees and shrubs, only a dozen blocks from the main street. They let
themselves in with a key and appeared to be the only occupants of the
place.

We looked the spot over for several days and evenings. There was a
servant girl about the place, but no children and no dogs. This was
good. Children, particularly young ones, often need attention in the
night, which interferes with the prowler. Dogs, young or old, are the
bane of the burglar’s life. A dog inside a house where people are
sleeping prohibits burglary, and the smaller he is, the louder he
prohibits.  So far as we could see, the place looked made to order for
us. House burglars customarily work single-handed. Two men prowling
about in a house in the dark are apt to get confused if any one wakes
up, and shoot each other. It has happened.

“I wish this stool-pigeon moon wasn’t so bright to-night, kid,” said
Smiler as we waited in the shrubbery for our people to put out lights
and retire. At eleven o’clock the house was in darkness. “About three
hours more, kid, and we’ll get busy.”

We had been in the yard since nine o’clock, tense, watching, listening.
Six hours lying on the damp grass and wet from the heavy dew. And still
the burglar wonders how he catches those terrible colds that hang on and
on and finally develop into T.B.

It was agreed that I should stay outside and lend a hand in case
anything went wrong in the house with Smiler. Inside the house,
inexperienced as I was, I would be in the way. Smiler looked at his
watch for the hundredth time.

He removed his shoes, putting one in each hip pocket as far as it would
go, buttoned his coat tightly, and pulled his hat far down over his
eyes. Always clean, handsome, smiling, he wasn’t good to look at now. We
stepped toward the house, keeping out of the moonlight when possible. On
the rear porch Smiler tried the door and windows—all fastened. He
motioned me to stay where I was, and disappeared around the side of the
house in search of an unlatched window. No burglar uses force till he is
sure there is no window or door unfastened.

He was gone so long that I was getting worried when he silently appeared
from the other side; he had gone around the house. I left the porch and
joined him beside a window he had found unfastened.  He pointed to some
vines near by, where I took my stand to wait till he rejoined me. I
watched him intently, a pupil, apt at learning. The bottom of the window
was about even with his shoulder. He stood with arms upraised, hands
against the window sash, slowly, silently pushing it up. I listened, but
he made no sound. The night was calm, still, dead.

Then came a blinding flash of fire and the deadly roar of a rifle.
Broken glass, falling, tinkled, and a woman shrieked once hysterically.

My eyes had never left Smiler. He staggered back from the window
clutching his throat with both hands; his legs trembled like a spent
fighter’s, as he sank slowly to his knees.

For a moment I shrank with fear and shock, cold and helpless, into the
vines beside the house. The flash and deafening explosion coming out of
the still night when my nerves were at their highest tension petrified
me on the spot. Then my legs ran away with me and I found myself at the
back gate to the alley, the way we came in, fumbling at the latch. My
mind was clearing up now. The gate was open. I was wondering whether to
run up or down the alley, into the city or out of it. I expected to hear
more shots. Then I thought of Smiler, and looked back.

He was there in front of the window in the moonlight, on his hands and
knees now, shaking his head from side to side slowly.

There was no alarm yet. The night was calm and still again. There was
the smell of burnt powder in the air.

This was my first desperate experience. I didn’t know what to do. I
wanted to run on and save myself and I wanted to help Smiler.
Something—I don’t know what it was, but I don’t think it was courage or
bravery—turned me around and I ran back through the shrubbery to a spot
opposite the window from which the shot had been fired. In the clear
moonlight I could see that it was raised about six inches and one of its
lower panes was shattered.

The house was still in darkness. There was no sound inside. I must have
been in a panic still. No sane-thinking human would have done what I did
next.  I ran out in front of the window to Smiler, and standing over
him, put my arms under his, lifting him slowly to his feet. Blood was
streaming out of his mouth.  He slowly and weakly put one arm around my
neck. I held it there, grasping the hand that hung limply over my
shoulder, and with my other arm around his waist slowly dragged him to
the gate and out into the alley where he collapsed. His dead weight was
too much for me. I let his body slip gently to the ground. A twitching
shudder ran through him. He straightened out on his back and threw his
arms wide.  He was dead.

Still no sound came from the house. Next door I now heard a window
thrown up and voices calling, a light appeared. It seemed an age since
the shot was fired, yet it wasn’t three minutes. Smiler was beyond my
help. I must be off. I was drenched with the blood that spurted from a
wound in his neck. It was on my face and hands. My shirt front was
saturated with it. My coat was dripping blood. I thought of our room
downtown—no chance to make it in that condition.

Smiler’s watch chain glistened in the moonlight.  I tore at his pockets
and found his money. I went through them all, took everything, and ran
for blocks and blocks through the alley toward the outskirts of the
city. The dawn was coming fast. I must hide.  I turned out of the
alley into a street and walked on wondering what to do, where to go.

A “For Rent” sign on a large, neglected-looking residence halted me. Not
a soul was in sight on the street. I dodged into the yard, around to the
back, and found the kitchen door unlocked. Inside, I went into what had
been the dining room and sat down on the floor exhausted, nervous, and
covered with blood.

When it became light enough I explored the old house, finding nothing
but rags and old papers. There was no water in it and washing was out of
the question. I gathered up an armful of the rags and papers, making a
pallet of them by a window upstairs in a front room, where I could look
out on the street. I sat down on the pallet and began to think things
over.  It was the first good chance since I had left my father.  I
heartily wished myself back with him. If this was adventure I wanted no
more of it. I was done with it.  It had brought me to this. Tired,
hungry, bloody, afraid to go to sleep even if I could, lest I should be
found and dragged off to jail and surely convicted.  Smiler was dead. I
had no ties to bind me to the road.

Yes, I would get out of this mess somehow and go back to my father. I
was sorry for poor Smiler and would have stayed with him on the road,
but now it was different. I felt no remorse for any of the things we had
done. I wasn’t sorry. I didn’t even think they were wrong. That phase of
it never entered my mind.

Then I fell to thinking of Smiler’s tragic end; trying to puzzle it out:
Why the woman shrieked, why the house remained so dark and silent, and
why I wasn’t shot when I went to his assistance. There was no answer to
it all. I felt easier in my mind now that I had decided to quit the road
and go home, and longed for the night to come when I could leave my
hiding place and wash the blood off my hands and face and get fresh
clothes.

As the day wore on, feeling more secure, I stretched out on my bed of
rags and paper and tried to sleep, but it wouldn’t come to me. Later, in
the afternoon, I removed my coat and shoes and managed to doze fitfully
till evening. When it was dark enough to walk through the streets safely
I left the house and made my way to a hot sulphur spring that gushed out
of a hillside a mile away. There I stripped and scrubbed myself as best
I could in the dark, and without soap.  My clothes were stiff with dried
blood. I threw the shirt and underwear away, put my handkerchief about
my neck, and, buttoning my coat, started off in search of a store where
I could get a new outfit.

Since the night Smiler stole the coat for me we had never allowed
ourselves to get flat broke. With all his passion for gambling he would
hold on to a few dollars. With the money I found on him and my own, I
counted up thirty dollars. His watch wasn’t worth two dollars, a cheap
one he bought in San Francisco. I kept it as a memento. There was
nothing else of value in his pockets.

In a few minutes I found one of the many little general stores that
flourished in Salt Lake at that time, and purchased a suit, the cheapest
one there, for twelve dollars, and a fifty-cent shirt. I went back to
the spring with my bundle, where I donned the cheap bullswool suit and
threw my good one away. Tired and hungry, I crawled aboard a street car
citybound from the sulphur springs.

In the car I looked closely at my hands and saw there was still some
blood around my finger nails; there were dark spots on my shoes, too.
Hungry as I was, I first went into a barber shop, had a bath, and
scrubbed my shoes. Then to a restaurant, and while eating I decided to
go to our room and have a good sleep and get a suit of underclothes and
a few other things that I would need on my way home. I turned the whole
thing over in my mind and was sure there was no danger in going to the
room.

I was sitting at the table nearest the kitchen, finishing my meal, when
a policeman came in and sat opposite me. The waiter brought a steak
which was ready and waiting for him.

“Did they identify the dead burglar yet?” the waiter asked.

“No, not a thing on him.”

“How did it happen, anyway?”

“Just like the morning paper says. The woman’s husband was called away
unexpectedly. The hired girl had the night out and she was alone in the
house, sleeplessly walking around the rooms when this bird appeared at
the window. Scared half to death she got her husband’s rifle and fired
at him; then she fell in a faint. When she revived, the neighbors were
called and they got the police. The bird ran as far as the alley, and
dropped dead. The bullet cut an artery in his neck.”

From the restaurant I went directly to our room and to bed, where I
slept the sleep of exhaustion till some time next forenoon, when I was
roused by heavy knocking at my door. When I opened it, two big,
red-faced men shouldered in, told me I was under arrest, and ordered me
to put on my clothes. I washed and dressed. One of them put handcuffs on
me and made me sit in a chair while they searched the room without
finding anything that interested them.

The other then produced a bloodstained piece of paper, and, holding it
out before my eyes, said:

“Did you ever see that before?”

I looked at it. It was the landlord’s receipt for our room rent. They
had found it in a corner of one of Smiler’s pockets. Smiler had
continually drummed it into me never to answer any questions in case we
were arrested.

“Just clam up, kid. Tell them you’d rather not say anything till you get
a lawyer. They might slug you, but don’t talk; that’s your only
salvation.”

I remembered his advice and said to them as respectfully as I knew how:

“You gentlemen have arrested me for something, I don’t know what. But I
would rather not make any statement till I can see an attorney and get
his advice.”

The landlord now came to the room.

“Was this young man in this room night before last?”

“The bed wasn’t slept in,” he replied.

“That’s good, we’ll lock him up. Maybe he’ll talk then. You come along
with us, too. We want you to identify the dead one.”

The city jail was but a few blocks away and all four of us walked there
together. They took me inside and unlocked the handcuffs. A man at a
desk asked my name and age. I was then taken out the back door, and
across a yard into the jail building and locked in a cell with a solid
iron door, in a remote corner of the building. They didn’t threaten to
beat me up, and asked no more questions. A jailer came at noon with a
trusty, who put a pan of very good stew, a tin cup of coffee, and half a
loaf of bread in the cell.

I said to the jailer: “Mister, could I see a lawyer?”

He shut the door and locked it without answering me. The door wasn’t
opened again till midnight. I was lying awake on a bunk fighting bedbugs
in the dark. It seemed they were trying to eat me alive.

“Step out here, young man.”

I stepped out in my stocking feet.

“Put your shoes on, and come with us.”

They were the same two men that arrested me.  They took me out and up
the streets into the next block where we stopped at an undertaker’s.
They led me to a back room and up beside a table on which a figure was
lying, covered by a long, sheetlike, white cloth.  I stood there beside
the table between the two officers for a moment. Then, suddenly, one of
them snatched the sheet away from the upper part of the figure. The
other shook me violently and shouted:

“Did you ever see that man before?”

I knew Smiler was there before he snatched the sheet off. When we went
into the undertaker’s I felt they were going to show me his body, but I
couldn’t understand why. I learned later that some people are unnerved
at the sudden sight of a gruesome corpse, and, weakening, talk.

It hurt me to look at Smiler, his smile forever gone, changed to a
hideous, snarl-like grin, and a gaping hole in his throat.

I couldn’t think of anything else, so I said: “I want to see an
attorney, please.”

“You’ll get a lawyer when we get done with you.  You were with that
fellow when he was shot and we are going to charge you with an attempt
to commit burglary if you don’t tell us where you were night before
last.”

I was locked up again.

The following day the two officers took me out to the booking desk where
I was formally charged, and on the morning of the third day I went into
the police court for my hearing. One of the shyster lawyers, or “stir
steerers,” as the bums call them, came over to me.

“They tell me you want a lawyer,” pointing to the officers.

“Yes, I do.”

“Got any money, or friends?”

“I’ve got fifteen dollars in the office—and no friends.”

“Give me an order for the money, and I’ll look after you,” he said.

I gave him the order, he spoke to the two officers for a minute, and
then asked the judge for a continuance of twenty-four hours. This was
granted, and I was led back to the bedbugs in the dark cell.

The next day, when my case was called, the lawyer stood up and started
talking.

“Sit down!” roared the judge.

He obeyed.

A woman wearing a thick veil was called. I could not distinguish her
features. In a few words she told of shooting a man at her window. She
saw but one man, the one she shot. She was excused and hastily left the
courtroom.

My landlord was called, and testified that I was the roommate of the
dead burglar; that I was not in the room the night he was killed, and
when I appeared the following night I had on a different, a new suit.

The officers testified that they arrested me in the room and that I had
refused to make any statement.  The prosecutor stood up.

“Officer, when you accused this defendant of being an accomplice of the
dead man, did he deny it?”

“No, sir, he did not.”

The prosecutor looked wise, and sat down with a satisfied air—as if I
had been found guilty.

“Anything more?” asked the judge.

The prosecutor got up again. “It’s as plain as the nose on your face,
Your Honor. The dead man and this chap went out to rob that house. When
the other fellow was shot, this chap tried to help him away, but he was
too far gone. Then, what did he do?

“Your Honor,” he said, ominously pointing a finger at me, “he robbed his
dead companion. The dead man’s pockets were turned inside out. But in
his haste this man overlooked this—this telltale blood-soaked receipt,”
and he waved it about with great effect.

The judge frowned at me. The courtroom chair warmers craned necks in my
direction.

“What about that new suit he has on?” continued the prosecutor. “He
either bought it or stole it since the shooting. Why? Because the suit
he wore that night had blood on it. Blood, Your Honor, blood,” he
finished hoarsely.

I looked down at my shoes, wondering if the wizard was going to point
out the dark spots on them that I hadn’t succeeded in scrubbing off
entirely.

“Anything for the defense?” inquired the judge.

“We waive our defense,” said the “stir-steerer.” He left the room, and
luckily I never saw him.

“Defendant held to await the action of the grand jury.”

I was led away.

It was a relief to get into the county jail, away from the bedbugs. It
was clean. I was put in a cell with a fine old Mormon farmer, charged
with polygamy—unlawful cohabitation, to use the legal phrase. He was
well supplied with tobacco and food, from friends outside, which he
shared with me. We were confined to the cells all the time, and I made
no acquaintances while there. I did not try. I was much discouraged at
this turn of things against me, but was still hopeful of getting out and
returning to my father.

“You’ve been indicted by the grand jury,” said the jailer one morning,
some three weeks later, “and to-day you go up to the ‘big house.’”

Utah then was a territory and all persons indicted were at once
transferred to the custody of the United States marshal who, in addition
to his other duties, acted as warden of the territorial penitentiary. An
hour later I was taken out of my cell and turned over to a big, rawboned
man with a worn pistol swinging from a holster on his belt.

“Young feller, I don’t put irons on none of ’em,” he said to me, tapping
his gun. “Ef you want ter run, that’s yore business.”

In an hour I was at the penitentiary, where I made friends and incurred
obligations that turned my thoughts away from home and sent me back on
the road.




CHAPTER IX


To say I was shocked, stunned, or humiliated on entering the
penitentiary would not be the truth. It would not be true in nine cases
out of any ten. It would be true if a man were picked up on the street
and taken directly to a penitentiary, but that isn’t done. He is first
thrown into a dirty, lousy, foul-smelling cell in some city prison,
sometimes with an awful beating in the bargain, and after two or three
days of that nothing in the world can shock, stun, or humiliate him. He
is actually happy to get removed to a county jail where he can perhaps
get rid of the vermin and wash his body. By the time he is tried,
convicted, and sentenced, he has learned from other prisoners just what
the penitentiary is like and just what to do and what to expect. You
start doing time the minute the handcuffs are on your wrists. The first
day you are locked up is the hardest, and the last day is the easiest.
There comes a feeling of helplessness when the prison gates swallow you
up—cut you off from the sunshine and flowers out in the world—but that
feeling soon wears away if you have guts. Some men despair. I am sure I
did not.

Inside the prison I was brought before a convict clerk who took my name,
age, and nativity. I lied about them all. I couldn’t cheat the scales or
a measuring machine, and they got my correct weight and height. I did
screw my face up a little when I was photographed, and felt good about
it. My clothes were not taken, nor was my hair cut. I had a bath and was
turned loose in the yard where there were about one hundred prisoners,
some, like myself, in outside clothes awaiting trial, and others in
convict stripes doing time. The penitentiary was small then.  There was
no work except farming and gardening, which was all done by “cohabs,”
Mormons convicted of unlawful cohabitation, and a very decent lot of men
they were, never complaining of persecution, always ready to help their
fellow prisoners, and freely dividing the food, money, and tobacco with
which they were well supplied by friends and relatives.

The other prisoners played poker all day in the yard on blankets, and
occasionally a game of baseball, when they could get up enough ambition.
The food was fair. There was no discipline. Prisoners were expected to
appear at their cells at evening to be locked in, and to stay in them
till they were let out in the morning. They didn’t always do that.  In
prison parlance, the place was a “playhouse.”

The first man to speak to me in the yard was Shorty, the safe expert we
had visited. He came directly up to me and put out his hand. “Kid, that
was tough about Smiler. I wanted to see you both and apologize. I
thought you put me in the hole for some coin, but I found out that the
people lost just what you both said. I couldn’t imagine a gambling house
with a six-hundred-dollar bankroll.”

Shorty was one of the patricians of the prison, a “box man” doing time
for bank burglary. “I’ll put you in with the right people, kid. You’re
folks yourself or you wouldn’t have been with Smiler.”

I had no friends in the place. But the fact that I had been with Smiler,
that I had kept my mouth shut, and that Shorty had come forward to help
me, gave me a certain fixed status in the prison that nothing could
shake but some act of my own. I was naturally pleased to find myself
taken up by the “best people,” as Shorty and his friends called
themselves, and accepted as one of them.

Shorty now took me into the prison where we found the head trusty who
was one of the “best people” himself, a thoroughgoing bum from the road.
The term “bum” is not used here in any cheap or disparaging sense. In
those days it meant any kind of a traveling thief. It has long since
fallen into disuse.  The yegg of to-day was the bum of twenty years ago.

“This party,” said Shorty, “is one of the ‘Johnson family.’” (The bums
called themselves “Johnsons” probably because they were so numerous.)
“He’s good people and I want to get him fixed up for a cell with the
right folks.”

“Why don’t you go out and see George and his outfit? There’s an empty
bunk in their cell.”

We hunted up “George and his outfit.” They knew all about me apparently,
for George said, “Sure, put him in with us. If you don’t they’ll only
stick some gay cat in there and we’d have to throw him out in the
middle of the night.”

“What have they got on you, kid?” asked George.

I sat down with them all and went over the whole thing from the shooting
of Smiler to my arrival at the prison.

“And you’ve made no statement yet?”

“No.”

“Not even to the shyster?” George inquired.

“Not even to the shyster,” I replied.

George turned to the others. “He’ll beat that case.”

“Sure, he will,” they all said.

“Judge Powers can beat that case before lunch any day,” said Shorty.

“How’s he going to get the judge to defend him?  He hasn’t a dime, and
you’re talking about the best lawyer in the state,” George wanted to
know.

It was Shorty’s time to get superior now. “Where did I get that two
hundred dollars that’s out in the office? Didn’t him and Smiler bring it
up here to me for my end of that chippy gambling house’s bankroll.  The
judge will take this case for a hundred; it’s only an hour’s work for
him.”

George smiled. “Shorty, I knew damned well you’d do that,” and to me,
“Kid, that’s what comes of bein’ on the square. If you’d burnt Shorty
for his end of that coin, you’d have been here just the same, and you’d
have got a beatin’ instead of a lawyer and a lot of good advice from
real people.”

My case was disposed of right there. I had an attorney. But the bums had
already tried me and I was found not guilty. All I had to do was wait
for the day to come and I would be free. I was very grateful to them
all, and tried to tell them. “Aw, forget it,” they said.

“You can pay me the money when you get out and are lucky,” said Shorty.
“I’ll send for Judge Powers in the morning.”

At supper time I fell in line with my new friends and ate at the same
table, after which we marched to our cells and were locked in. These
scheming yeggs had managed to get possession of the most desirable cell
in the prison, probably by bribing the trusty prisoner whose duty it was
to look after the cell house.  On each side of the cell was a framework
ingeniously made of angle iron that contained two bunks, one above the
other. The mattresses were filled with clean straw, the blankets were
new and clean. George gave me a small feather pillow. In the center of
our cell at the upper end was a table on which stood a fine Rochester
oil lamp that gave plenty of light. Newspapers were produced, and the
“best people” settled themselves for the evening.

George, who by reason of his age and experience was “captain of the
outfit,” explained to me that, being the last man in the cell, it was my
duty to empty the slop bucket in the morning and sweep out.

I must stop to describe briefly my three cellmates, all persistent and
professional criminals, because of their influence on my after life.

A name on a prison register doesn’t usually mean anything. Although I
knew George well later, I never learned from him his family name or
birthplace.  To ask about those things in the underworld is to invite
suspicion. All criminals conceal them carefully and resent questions.
George was known on the road and to the police as “Foot-and-a-half
George” because of an injury to one of his feet that cost him a couple
of toes and caused a slight limp. It happened in this way, as he told me
one night when we were waiting to open up the powder house at a rock
quarry and get a supply of fresh dynamite, caps and fuse.

“I always crush into these powder shacks for my ‘puff’ for two reasons;
first, it’s always in good condition; second, if you buy it you’ve got
to leave your mug with the storekeeper. He’s always suspicious of
anybody buying explosives and is apt to remember you and cause trouble
later in case of a pinch.

“I got this bum foot,” he said, sticking it out, pointing to the shoe
with its bent-up toe, “through buying a roll of rotten fuse at an
out-of-the-way general store in Montana. I was goin’ against ‘P.O.’s’
then. I always favored post offices because in the small country ones
the postmaster has to furnish the box himself and gets the cheapest one
he can find. He don’t care because the government stands the loss if
it’s a plain burglary from the outside.

“Besides that, you’re a cinch to get some coin and a bundle of stickers
out of every ‘P.O.’ You can peddle the stamps anywhere at sixty or
eighty per cent and they can’t be identified. Then again, if you do
fall, the government don’t hang a lot of prior convictions on you and
bury you. The limit for a ‘P.O.’ is five years and you never get that if
you use a little judgment. Yes, I’m strong for the government,” mused
the veteran, reflectively.

“This caper I’m tellin’ you about was a third-class ‘P.O.’ outside of
Butte, Montana. It was soft, and good for a few hundred dollars so I
decided to go against it alone. No use takin’ a bunch of thirsty bums
along and stealin’ money for them to slop up in some saloon the next
day. Anyway, I had a hole in the old box an’ a shot in it in half an
hour. I strung the fuse to a window and touched it off from the outside.
It spluttered along the floor and up to the door of the box, but nothing
happened. After a few minutes I went back inside to put on a fresh piece
of fuse.  Just as I got in front of the box there was a roar, the door
came off, and knocked me flat. The edge of it caught my foot on the
floor and smashed all the toes.”

“Did you get the coin?”

“You’re damn right, I did.

“After my wind came back I got the coin and stickers, limped outside
where I had an old ‘swift’ tied to a hitching rack. I had no saddle and
it was a tough ride into Silver Bow Junction. But I got there before
daylight and grabbed a rattler into Pocatello where ‘Salt Chunk Mary’
put me away, got a doctor, and got rid of my ‘stickers.’ That’s why I’m
so particular about my fuse,” he concluded.

This grizzled old yegg was a by-product of our Civil War. Apprentice to
a village blacksmith, he was drafted into the army, where he learned the
disruptive force of powder, and many other things useful to him in his
profession of safe breaking. His rough war service, his knowledge of
mechanics and explosives combined to equip him for what he became—one of
the pioneers of safe breaking. From black powder he turned to dynamite
and afterward was one of the first to “thrash out the soup”—a process
used by the bums and yeggs for extracting the explosive oil, nitro
glycerine, from sticks of “dan” or dynamite.  He boasted that he had
never done a day’s work outside of prison since he was mustered out of
the army, except one year in a safe factory in the East where he went
deliberately and worked for starvation wages to learn something of the
construction of a very much used make of safe and its lock. Fortified
with this knowledge, he followed that particular make of safe to many
parts of the world, and, as he said, “knocked ’em open like ripe
watermelons.”

George inherited a very ordinary set of features to start with. His war
scars and rough bouts on the road and in prison hadn’t served to add
anything to them in the way of refinement. His head rose to a point from
all four sides. The “Sanctimonious Kid,” one of my cellmates, once said
of George: “If you were to put a dime on the top of George’s head and
start it sliding down the back it would fall inside his shirt collar; if
you started it down his forehead it would wind up in his mouth, his
lower jaw sticks out so far.” His eyes were small and cunning.  They
looked as if they had been taken out, fried in oil, and put back. Dead,
pale blue and expressionless, they gave no hint of the cunning,
always-busy brain behind them. His nose wasn’t worth looking at, just a
small knob of soft red flesh, long since collapsed and hanging like a
pendant from between his eyes. He was of medium height, broad, heavy and
rugged. With all his ill-favored appearance and his rolling, limping
walk that seemed to start at his shoulders and work its way down into
his legs, he had a heart of gold and oak, and knowing him one readily
forgave him ungovernable temper and violent outbursts of rage. He was
square. His life was stormy and his death sudden and violent as
“Smiler’s.” But that has another place in this story.

The “Sanctimonious Kid” was, in point of years and experience, second to
George, and naturally second in say in the cell. All matters of
importance were submitted to George first, then to “Sanc” and lastly to
“Soldier Johnnie,” the third man. Nothing was submitted to me. I had no
say about anything. All I had to do was to keep my mouth shut and listen
all I wanted to.

“Sanc” had everything that George lacked. Tall, six feet, slender and
soft stepping, more active than most men half his size, you would not
suspect him of two hundred pounds, solid flesh and bone. Straight
without stiffness, natural, like an Indian. Dark hair, eyes and skin.
Handsome, intelligent. Years after, I saw him in the dock of a crowded
court room in a big city. His head was the finest, his face the
handsomest, and his poise the surest of any there, from the judge down
to the alternate juror. His nose, eyes and forehead might have been
those of a minister or divinity student. But there was a hard look about
his mouth, and something in his jaw that suggested the butcher. He was
educated and a constant reader.  Whether it was his appearance or his
careful manner of speech that got him his monoger, “The Sanctimonious
Kid,” I never knew. He was serving a short sentence for house burglary,
at which he was an expert.

We traveled together for several years after he was released, and I
found him one of the squarest and most resourceful thieves I ever knew.
At last, after one of the cleverest prison escapes on record, he went to
Australia where he was hanged for the murder of a police constable.

“Soldier Johnnie,” who had served a term in the army, was the youngest
of the three. He was an industrious and trustworthy yegg who made his
living serving as “target” or outside man, for the yegg mobs that preyed
on country banks. The “target” is the most reliable man in the mob. To
him is given the job of sticking up the town bull if he appears while
the others are inside. He is the first one to get shot at and the last.
It’s his job to carry the heavy artillery and stand off the natives
while the others get the coin, and then to cover the get-away.

He was born lucky. His face and figure were neutral. A hard man to pick
up on his description.  Medium size and weight. After one look at him
you couldn’t say whether his hair was brown or black, whether his eyes
were gray or blue. Quiet, unobtrusive, soft-spoken, a copper would
hesitate before halting him on the street.

Such were my companions, guides, friends and philosophers, day and
night, till the day of my trial, which soon came.

Shorty’s letter to Judge Powers brought one of his office men out to see
me the next day, who got the points in my case and went away with one
hundred dollars of Shorty’s money. I felt better after his visit, he was
so fresh, vigorous, confident. “Nothing to it, young man,” he said
breezily, “I’ll be in court when you appear to plead and have a day set
for your trial; that is, if they want to waste their time trying you.”

I went back into the prison yard with his card in my hand and gave it to
Shorty. He passed it to George and then to “Sanc.”

“I know him,” Sanc said. “He is in Powers’ firm.  Powers will tell him
what to do. You are all right.  True, he is but a second-class man, but
that’s not so bad. These second-class lawyers can skin a first-class
bunko man any day in the week. I see no reason why he cannot skin a
third-class judge in a territorial court.”

I soon saw that these three cellmates of mine practically controlled the
inside of the prison. They had brains and character backed by courage
and the valuable background of a reputation for doing things outside.

I say they had character because, while they did wrong things, they
always tried to do them in the right way and at the right time. The
thief who goes out and steals money to pay back room rent rather than
swindle his poor landlady has character. The one who runs away without
paying her has no character.  The thief who holds out a lady’s watch on
his pal to give to his girl has no character.

In the underworld one has good or bad character as in any other layer of
society. The thief who pays off borrowed money, debts, or grudges has a
good character among his fellows; and the thief who does the reverse has
a bad character. Thieves strive for good character and make as great
sacrifices to keep it as men do anywhere else. A burglar can have
friends, but he has to pay his room rent or he will lose them, and they
will despise him.

Because of this quality these three men had money in the prison office,
sent them by friends at liberty.

They had visitors frequently, who kept them well supplied with books and
magazines. The evening mail brought newspapers from many cities. They
kept well informed, particularly about criminal and legal doings. The
papers were carefully read at night, and the next morning “routed”
throughout the prison till, torn and read ragged, they found their way
into the hands of the lowliest “bindle stiff” in the farthest corner of
the yard.

There were fat times when we didn’t go into the dining room for a week.
A half-gallon bucket of milk was left at the cell every evening. Loaves
of fresh, hot bread were smuggled up from the bakeshop, and juicy steaks
from the guards’ quarters. These creature comforts helped to take the
curse off the place, and mitigate the prison pangs. Our light was put
out, not when the nine o’clock bell rang, but when George, or Sanc, or
Johnnie felt like going to sleep. The guards looked the other way when
they went by in their felt-soled shoes, on their night rounds through
the prison.

In the prison yard there was a deep well from which water for bathing
and other uses was pumped to a large tank on the prison roof. The pump
was manned by four prisoners who had to work in one-hour shifts.  A gang
of eight men were detailed each week for this work, which was not
hard—nothing more than exercise—and no one ever complained. My name was
called one Saturday evening and I was instructed to report at the pump
the following Monday morning. I thought nothing of it, and would have
pumped cheerfully. But that night “Soldier Johnnie,” who was something
of a jail lawyer and agitator for his and his friends’ rights, remarked
that they were wrong in forcing me to work because I had not been
convicted of any crime and that I ought to refuse to do it. The other
two took the matter up and it was argued pro and con. They were pretty
technical about it, and the weight of opinion was that it would be
establishing a dangerous precedent for an unconvicted man to do any work
of any kind in the prison and a test case should be made of it.

I was willing enough, and, looking back at it now, I believe I was glad
of the chance to do something to raise myself in the estimation of these
distinguished characters.

Monday morning I refused to work, explaining to the officer in charge
that I was not lazy, but felt they had no right to order me to work
before I was convicted. He appeared surprised, and took me to the office
of the prison captain. He heard me out, and turning to the guard, said:
“Throw this fresh kid in the cooler and leave him there till he gets
ready to work.”

I was given an old pair of overalls and a cotton shirt to wear in the
“cooler,” where my outside clothes would have been ruined. The cooler or
dark cell was the same as other cells, except that there was nothing in
it and the door was solid, admitting no light. The floor and walls were
of thin steel and very cold. I slept on the floor without any kind of
bedding or cover.  There was but one fixture in the cell, a sheet-metal
bucket smelling strongly of chloride of lime. My sentence carried the
further punishment of bread and water, one thick slice a day and about a
quart of water.

A guard opened the cell in the afternoon the first day and put in a
quart tin cup of water but no bread.  As he was closing the cell, he
said, not unkindly: “You’re a damned fool, kid. You’d better weaken and
promise to go on the pump. I’ll tell the captain now, if you want, and
you won’t have to freeze in here to-night.”

“No, I won’t weaken,” I declared.

“All right, but if you change your mind just rap on the door with that
tin cup.”

My teeth were chattering before nine o’clock that night, it was so cold.
I could not sleep on the cold steel floor and walked up and down in my
stocking feet all night. The next morning it became warmer and I slept
in fits till noon when the guard came with my bread and a fresh cup of
water. The bread was about half eaten when something got between my
teeth that made me stop chewing, hungry as I was.

I examined it, lying on my belly at the bottom of the door, where there
was a crack of light. It was a piece of chicken quill about an inch
long. I couldn’t imagine how it got into the bread, and out of curiosity
and having nothing else to do, I broke it apart. There was a tightly
rolled piece of paper inside, on which was written: “Stick. We’ll feed
you to-night.” There was no name, no explanation. I knew it was from my
cellmates, and put in the balance of the day trying to figure how they
would manage to get food into that tight cell in plain view of a guard
all day and night.

The cell above me was part of the prison proper, and was occupied by two
prisoners doing time. That afternoon I heard unusual noises in it, and
they indicated that some one was moving out or in.  Immediately after
“lockup” in the evening there was another new noise. Prisoners in
dungeons rely almost entirely on sounds to tell them what is going on
about them.  Every sound has its meaning. No sound escapes them, and any
new or unusual sound must be thought out and classified at once.

The sound that attracted my attention was a low, grinding rasping that
seemed to come from the floor of the cell above, which was the roof of
my cell. One person above walked back and forth with his shoes on,
making considerable noise. Something very unusual. The rasping became
more distinct, and after an hour’s thought I concluded that somebody up
above was boring a hole through the thin steel floor and that the
walking was to cover the noise of drilling and to keep watch for the
guard. Before nine o’clock there was an inch hole in the floor, and
strips of tender meat, long pieces of bread, toasted to hold them
together, cigarettes, and matches were being lowered into my cell. After
them came a long, thin piece of rubber hose, from which I sucked about a
quart of strong coffee.

I spent about three weeks in the cooler and never missed my evening
meal. My cellmates bribed the night guard to give me a blanket at night,
which he took away from me before he went off watch in the morning, to
protect himself. All in all, I didn’t fare so badly and was getting
pretty well settled down to life in the dark cell when they took me out
one evening and sent me back to my cell with instructions to be ready in
the morning to go to court. I found my clothes in good shape and a clean
shirt had been procured for me by my cellmates.

They seemed to think they owed me an apology for not being able to get
food into the dark cell until the second night, explaining in great
detail how they had to get two gay cats moved out of the cell above me
and have two members of the “Johnson family” put in it, who would attend
to the matter. I was instructed by them to ask for an immediate trial;
the captain had declared that he would keep me in the cooler till I
either got acquitted or went to work pumping.

The next morning the man from Judge Powers’ office was in court and told
me to plead not guilty.  When this formality was done with, he asked for
a trial on the earliest possible date, saying that it would not take
more than two hours to try the case.

“Two hours,” said the judge, looking over his calendar, “how would the
day after to-morrow do?”

There was no objection from either side. The case was set for trial. I
went back to the prison and into the cooler. That evening my rations
came down as usual. The guard gave me my blanket, but I couldn’t sleep.
Everybody was confident I would be acquitted, but I was afraid. I
remembered my experience in Denver when the judge gave me fifteen days
without a hearing, and at Port Costa when Casey gave us ten days. I
imagined the procedure would be about the same in this case and was very
uneasy.

The next evening I was sent back to my cell. I found plenty to eat
waiting me, and after a good supper my case was tried by my cellmate
lawyers. They threshed it out from every conceivable angle, and declared
that if I got convicted I would have to do it myself on the witness
stand. They were so sure I wouldn’t come back that George gave me a
ten-dollar bill.

“Take that, Kid, you’ll need it. You can send it back when you feel
able.”

I promised to write them, and we agreed on a fictitious name for me to
use. They all shook hands, bade me good-bye, and sent me away in high
hopes.

Judge Powers himself was in court the next morning. A fine, tall, gray,
elderly gentleman, he patted me on the back in a fatherly manner.

“Young man, I am going to put you on the witness stand and ask you one
question: ‘Are you guilty or not guilty of this charge?’ You answer
‘No,’ and don’t answer any other questions from anybody unless I tell
you to.”

The jury was drawn in ten minutes. The witnesses that testified at the
police court came on in the same order and gave the same testimony.
Judge Powers asked the veiled woman we were preparing to rob if she had
seen me at her house on the night in question or on any other night. She
answered that she saw but one man, the one she shot. The detectives
confined themselves to the truth. Powers looked at his watch with the
air of a busy man being detained over a trifling matter, and dismissed
them without cross-examination. He waved the landlord off the stand
without questioning him. When the prosecutor said: “That’s our case,
Your Honor,” Powers looked at him, and then to the jury.

“Is that all?” he asked, frowning.

I was put on the witness stand and answered “No” very positively to his
question. The prosecutor hadn’t anything to cross-examine me about. He
started a few questions, but was stopped and gave up. My attorney made
some motion and was overruled. He then offered to let the case go
without argument from either side, but the prosecutor wanted to talk and
the judge told him to go ahead.

He argued about the same as the prosecutor in the police court, waved
the bloody room-rent receipt and harped about the change of clothes and
my absence from the room, and my refusal to make any statement. He
dingdonged away till the judge ordered him to stop.

Judge Powers went over the case in five minutes, the jury was instructed
in five more, and went away to the jury room. I was nervous. I thought
my attorney had not asked enough questions, hadn’t argued enough. The
judge went into his chambers.  Judge Powers followed him in for a visit.
A few courtroom hangers got up and went out. Nobody paid any attention
to me. The bailiff who had me in charge strolled about the room,
gossiping. There was no dock in the courtroom. I was sitting outside the
railed-off enclosure at the attorneys’ table. The jury hadn’t been out
fifteen minutes, but I was so nervous I couldn’t sit still, and got up
to stretch my legs. The bailiff was busy talking to a man who came in
from the street. His back was turned to me as I walked a few steps up
the aisle in the direction of the door, and then back.

The next time I walked farther toward the door before turning, and still
he never looked at me. The third time I went to the door and out, and
oozed down the broad, single flight of stairs into the main street.
Dodging between two hacks at the curb I crossed to the opposite side of
the street and looked back up the stairway to the courtroom—no alarm
yet.  Directly in front of me was a basement restaurant.  I went
downstairs, straight through the dining room to the kitchen, into the
back yard, and then to the alley without being molested. When I got out
of the alley I turned every corner I came to for fifteen minutes and
finished in the railroad yards, instinctively.

The whistles were blowing for twelve o’clock, noon.  I saw no signs of
any outgoing trains and decided to plant myself somewhere nearby till
night, when I could get a train or walk out of town in safety. I found
an old deserted barn and hid up in the loft, hungry and thirsty, till
dark.

A passenger train was due out on the Rio Grande at eight. With much
caution I made my way along between lines of box cars till I got near
enough to the depot to get aboard the blind end of a baggage car.  I
held the train all night, carefully dodging about at every stop.

At daylight, as the train slowed down for a stop, a man climbed up
beside me. “You’re arrested,” he shouted, tapping a big gun in its
holster.

I was discouraged. After all my hiding and dodging and starving, I must
now go back to Salt Lake.  He took me off the train and held my arm as
the train pulled out. I was scared and desperate. I could see the
penitentiary opening up for me again, and the dungeon. As the last coach
was even with us, I gave the constable, that’s who he was, a vicious
push and he fell into a ditch beside the track.

The train was moving fast now, but with a tremendous effort I clutched
one of the handbars and the momentum threw me up on the rear steps. Just
as I landed, one of the trainmen opened the rear door and saw me. He had
his mouth open to say something when he saw the constable crawling out
of the ditch, firing his pistol in the air and making signs to him. He
pulled the bell cord.

As the train slowed down two more trainmen appeared and the three began
kicking me. I jumped off and fell into the hands of the constable, who
came up reënforced by some natives from the depot. They all fell on me
and gave me an unmerciful skull dragging. After they got done scruffing
me around, two of them took me by each arm and the constable fastened
both hands in my coat collar from behind. The ones that couldn’t find a
place to lay hold on me surrounded us, a tribe of small boys appeared
from nowhere, and I was dragged, pushed, and bumped across the fields to
the village and thrown into the jail.

When I was safely locked in, the constable mopped his forehead with his
sleeve, and, shaking his fist at me, said: “Sure as God made little
apples I’ll see that you get ten days.” They all went away then except
the small boys. They lingered around all afternoon peeping in at the
windows.

It was a mail-order jail—two steel cells on a concrete foundation. A
cheap wooden shack had been built around the cells to keep the weather
out. The door of the shack was always open and there was plenty of
light. The cell they put me in was clean, and there was a roll of new
blankets in it. I was the only prisoner.

I unrolled the blankets and, stretching out on the floor, tried to
figure out what had happened. I couldn’t understand the constable’s
threat to get me ten days, and concluded he was so excited that he said
ten days when he meant ten years.

He turned out to be a very decent fellow. He was postmaster, section
boss, and constable. He appeared at the jail in the evening with a big
dishpan full of food—bread, meat, butter, a fruit jar full of fresh
milk, and half a pie. He apologized for having lost his temper and
treating me so roughly, asked me if I wanted tobacco, and made a special
trip back to his house for some old magazines.

I was surprised to learn that I had been arrested for trespass, or
stealing a ride. He explained that the bums had burned a string of box
cars farther up the road and the “company” had sent out orders to arrest
them on sight and give them ten days.

“It’s a wonder somebody along the road didn’t tell you about it,” he
said. “You’re the first one I’ve seen for a month. The bums are all
going over the Union Pacific now instead of the Rio Grande. It’s too
bad, you’ll get ten days sure in the morning. Company’s orders. Good
night.”

I put in most of the night trying to think up a talk for the judge next
morning. After bringing my breakfast the constable went after him, and
about nine o’clock they appeared, a few town loungers following them.
They didn’t even take me out of the cell for my “trial.”

The judge asked my name, read the law from a code he brought along,
listened patiently to my talk, and solemnly sentenced me to ten days in
the jail.  I asked him to take my ten-dollar bill and let me go, but he
refused it.

“Sorry, young man. Can’t do it. Company’s orders, ten days.”

One of the loungers threw me a Salt Lake newspaper, another gave me a
sack of tobacco, cigarette papers, and matches. When they had gone I
opened the paper and found the story of my escape from the courtroom.
The reporter treated it humorously, and made fun of everybody connected
with my trial. I didn’t know what he saw about it that was so funny till
I got to the end of it, where he said the jury came in with their
verdict of “not guilty” before I was out of the block.

This took a big load off my mind; nothing to fear now. I could go back
to Salt Lake and wait for my friends to come out of prison. The
Sanctimonious Kid had but two weeks more to do, Soldier Johnnie but a
month. George had almost a year yet to do.

All thought of going home was gone. I owed money to Shorty and George.
That must be paid. All worry was off my mind now and I began planning to
get some money when I got out. My head was full of schemes I had
absorbed during my month in the penitentiary. George’s tales of fat post
offices and country general stores came back to me. Idle all day in my
cell, my eyes and thoughts turned to the big general store directly
across the street from the jail.

The constable often talked to me in the evening while I ate supper. I
learned from him that all the money in the town was in the big safe in
the store, his post office money and stamps included. The store owner,
as was often the case in small towns, did a banking business and had
acquired about all the money in the place.

It was a puzzle to me how to get out of the town when my time was up
without spending my ten dollars for fare. This was not to be thought of.
The constable solved it by volunteering to put me on a freight train
that stopped there in the daytime and fix it with the crew to let me
ride back to Salt Lake, where I could start east over the Union Pacific.

The morning my ten days expired I went over to the store, bought some
tobacco, and waited around till time for the train. I got the make of
the big safe, its location in the store, and any other information I
could, without asking questions, and decided to report the matter to my
friends at Salt Lake. The constable fixed me for a ride, as he promised,
but instead of stopping at Salt Lake I went on to Ogden and wrote a
letter to Sanc, telling him where I would be when he came out. I was
careful with my ten dollars and had half of it when he appeared at
Ogden.

I at once told him of my ten-day sentence and about the fat general
store. He had promised to wait for Soldier Johnnie, who was due in three
weeks, and offered to pay my expenses till then, when something might be
done about my store.

Johnnie was discharged in due time and arrived at Ogden. He was pretty
well supplied with money and there was no rush about doing anything. We
talked over the general store, but Johnnie didn’t like the looks of it.
The night trains didn’t stop at the town, and it was so far from Salt
Lake that horses were out of the question.

“No getaway,” he said. “I can beat the box all right, but we can’t get
out of there if we do get the money.” Sanc agreed.

During my ten-day stay in the town I had turned over in my mind a
hundred plans, but only one of them seemed feasible, and I was almost
afraid to broach that to them. At last, when I saw they were going to
give it up as a bad job, I said to them:

“Can’t you both go over there, get yourselves ten days like I did, make
a key for the cell, and go out at night and get the box? You could plant
the money and lock yourselves up again. Then when your time is up you
can go away and come back for the coin when the thing cools off.”

They looked at me and laughed. An hour later Sanc said to Johnnie:

“Say, there might be something in that, after all.  We would have a
perfect alibi.”

The bizarre appealed to Sanc.

After some discussion they decided to “look into it.”




CHAPTER X


An apprentice to a mob of yeggs has to do the rough, unskilled work just
as if he were learning a trade from any craftsman. I was sent out to get
dynamite, caps, and fuse at a railroad construction camp, and returned
with them safely. My next job was to go out and buy a number of twist
drills.  Johnnie hired a horse, bought a couple of blankets and a pair
of overalls, and set off to look over the general store. The dynamite
and drills were to be left near the store so they would be available in
case they decided to “crush” into the jail and beat the box while
serving their time.

He returned in a week, very enthusiastic. The box looked good. There
were guns and ammunition in the store. The jail was empty. There was a
blacksmith shop where other necessary tools could be had, the town was
dead at night. He had fitted keys to the padlocks on both the jail cells
(all this would have been my work if I had not been known in the town),
and had planted his “dan,” caps, and fuse safely near the jail. He had
picked out another spot near the jail where the money was to be planted.

Their plan was to buy tickets to the town nearest the one where I was
arrested, on the same passenger train, then to get out and on the
baggage, where the hostile constable would find them. I was given enough
money to supply my wants till the business was over.  They secreted the
jail keys carefully in their shoes.  The cautious Johnnie had also
planted in the empty jail files and blank keys to be used in case they
lost those they were carrying.

“The only danger is,” said Sanc, “that some other bums may be picked up
and thrown into this jail with us.”

“In that case,” Johnnie replied, “we’ll have to do our ten days and
crush right back in again and stay there till we can get the jail all to
ourselves.”

“Kid,” said Sanc, as they were leaving, “watch the papers. If it goes
all right we’ll be back in about two weeks. If it goes wrong, and you
never can tell, you will know from the papers what happened. Then send
somebody up to the ‘stir’ to see George and he will tell you what to
do.”

Ten days later the burglary was reported in the papers. Four thousand
dollars had been taken from the general store and the man hunt was on.
The burglars had worked quietly. The theft was not discovered till
opening-up time the next morning. The thieves were evidently experts,
and left behind them the most complete set of safe-breaking tools seen
in years, etc., etc. They had escaped by taking a hand car from the
section house. It was found wrecked several miles down the railroad
track.

Johnnie and Sanc had strengthened their alibi and strangled any
suspicion that might fall on them by taking the “John O’Brien”—the bums’
term for hand car, so called because every other section boss in those
days was named O’Brien—and starting it down the railroad. There was a
slight grade and it traveled several miles before jumping the track into
the ditch, where it was found wrecked, “abandoned by the burglars.”

The hunt started from there. Blanket stiffs looking for work were
brought in, questioned, locked up for a day or two, and let go. The
trains were searched up and down the line. Bums were brought in, got
their ten days, but the burglars escaped and in a week the hue and cry
was over. It was almost three weeks before the burglars showed up at
Ogden. They were nervous and irritable, complaining that the jail had
got uncomfortably filled up the last few days they were there. They got
lousy from the blanket stiffs. The constable was sore about the burglary
and wouldn’t square them for a ride into Salt Lake as he had done for
me, and they had to pay their fare out of the town. Their money was
almost gone, and there, in that little burg, was four thousand dollars
that couldn’t be touched for at least a month, and somebody was liable
to “steal” it on them. I got nervous, too.

We decided to go up to Pocatello and kill the month around Salt Chunk
Mary’s, where we would be safe and welcome, and where they could borrow
enough money to live on until the time came to go after the four
thousand. After a night’s ride we were welcomed by Mary, who spread the
customary feed of beans and salt pork before us. She inquired anxiously
about “Foot-and-a-half George.” She seemed to know every bum on the road
of any consequence.

Johnnie put in his time down in the jungle drinking with the bums. Sanc
and I either watched the fine six-foot Indians that stalked about the
town looking scornfully at their white inferiors, or the tinhorn
gamblers who skinned the railroad men on pay days and each other
afterward.

Pay day was coming on and the town took on a busy aspect. Small-money
gamblers appeared with their women companions. “Brass peddlers,” bums
who sold imitation gold jewelry, principally rings, appeared on the
streets with their ninety-cents-a-dozen gold “hoops” made in Wichita,
Kansas, and “dropped” them to the Indian squaws and railroad laborers
for any price from one dollar up. Other bums had bundles of pants and
shoes planted in the jungle, the proceeds of a boxcar burglary on the
Oregon Short Line. These articles were peddled openly about the
railroad shops and to trainmen in the yards. A band of yeggs on their
way to Great Falls and then to the “Canadian side” stopped off to
thresh out their “soup” in the jungle.

The “Johnson family” became so numerous that a “convention” must be
held. In any well-ordered convention all persons of suspicious or
doubtful intentions are thrown out at the start. When a bums’
“convention” is to be held, the jungle is first cleared of all outsiders
such as “gay cats,” “dingbats,” “whangs,” “bindle stiffs,” “jungle
buzzards,” and “scissors bills.” Conventions are not so popular in these
droughty days.  Formerly kegs of beer were rolled into the jungle and
the “punks,” young bums, were sent for “mickies,” bottles of alcohol.
“Mulligans” of chicken or beef were put to cooking on big fires. There
was a general boiling up of clothes and there was shaving and sometimes
haircutting.

The yeggs threshed out their “soup” and prepared for the road. The
“brass peddlers” compared notes and devised new stunts for “dropping”
their wares.  Traveling beggars, crippled in every conceivable manner,
discussed the best “spots” for profitable begging.  Beggars of this type
are always welcomed at a “convention” or any other place where thieves
or bums congregate.

This may seem strange, but it’s a fact. The underworld beggars are the
most reliable and trustworthy, the most self-sacrificing and the
quickest to help of any class of people outside the pale of society.
Crippled, wounded thieves, fugitives and escaping prisoners, if they
know what they are about, always turn to the beggars for aid and are
never refused. They are sheltered in the beggar’s humble “flop,” his
small “plunge” (money he begs) is divided with them, and he carries
messages any distance to their friends and relatives. The beggar minds
his own business, settles his own feuds, and I cannot recall ever seeing
one of them in court testifying against anybody for anything.

This convention at Pocatello ended in a most unusual way. Nobody was
killed, none of them fell in the fire. There was no fighting. When their
“pennies” were all “slopped up,” and the food eaten, the bums folded
their tents and stole silently away to their different activities.

Sanc and Johnnie borrowed money from Mary and we went back to Ogden,
where they prepared for their journey, horseback, after our coin.

“Are you both going?” I asked.

“Yes,” they answered without looking at each other.  I wondered if each
mistrusted the other, and if I would ever see either of them again, or
any of the money.

My fear of never seeing Sanc or Johnnie was groundless and a wrong to
them. They returned within a week to the cheap lodging house where we
quartered at Ogden. The four thousand was split in three equal parts. I
was sent out with about seventy-five dollars in silver coin to lay off
for paper or gold.  They looked at me curiously as I stowed away my bit.

“Top dough for you, isn’t it, kid?” said Sanc.

“Yes, two hundred was the most I ever had. I didn’t expect to get
one-third of this money. I doubt if I earned it. I took no chances. You
two did all the work.”

“We talked that over,” he replied, “and decided you were entitled to an
even cut. It was your caper, you located it. You had the nerve to
propose what we first thought was a bughouse caper. We are clean so far
as the coppers are concerned. If we ever do any time for this we’ll have
to plead guilty to it.  The constable of that town would be our best
witness if we got picked up on it. He would never admit that we could
screw (key) out of his jail, beat that box, plant the coin, throw the
jail screws in the creek, and go back and lock ourselves up. He might
admit that it could happen to some other jail, but he will swear it
couldn’t be done to his, see?

“But here’s the main reason we gave you an even cut of the coin. From
the way you stepped in Smiler’s case, and the way you took your jolt in
the cooler at the ‘big house’ we know you are ‘right.’ If anything had
gone wrong with this caper and we had to take a pinch, we figured you
would have been a big help on the outside. That’s why you are declared
‘in and in’ with the works.

“And now that we can lay off for a while, where will we go?” turning to
Johnnie.

“First,” said Johnnie, “we’ll go back to Pocatello and pay Mary. She
told me she was going to Salt Lake soon to visit George at the ‘big
house.’ I want to send a few dollars to some people there. The kid here
wants to pay the hundred to Shorty that went to Judge Powers and the ten
George gave him. You’ll probably want to send something, too. We can
give it all to Mary and she’ll deliver it. While we’re there I’ll have
her buy me a pair of ‘smoke wagons.’ No telling how soon I’ll be broke,
and if I have a couple of guns I won’t be helpless. Then I’m going home
for the winter, if nothing happens. When I got this last jolt I wrote
and told my people I was going to Alaska for two years and they
wouldn’t hear from me till I got back.

“I go home now and then when I have a decent piece of money. My old
people are both living, and I’ve got seven brothers and sisters. I bring
them all something nice for presents, not that they need anything, but
just to rub it into them. I am the youngest and always had to take the
leavings. The first lock I ever busted was on the pantry in the kitchen
of my old New Hampshire home, so far away.

“Where are you going, kid?”

“I’d like to stay with you people, but if you are going to split out,
I’ll go to San Francisco for a while.”

“You can go with me,” cut in Sanc. “I’m going to San Francisco for the
winter. No New Hampshire winter for me.”

I think the two of them were looking forward to a few months of quiet,
peace, and maybe dissipation.  My thoughts were running ahead to future
burglaries.  No thought of going home, even when Johnnie was telling of
his home life. When I was hiding in the empty house covered with
Smiler’s blood, I wanted to go home, because I was in a tough hole. Now
I was safe, independent, the life fascinated me. No thought of home now.

“What shall I do with the balance of the dynamite and drills?” I asked.
“Somebody might step on the bundle and blow the house down. It’s planted
out in the back.”

“I’m going to meet George here in the spring when he gets out,” said
Sanc. “It would save us the trouble of stealing more if we could plant
it.” He was thoughtful for a minute.

“Kid, in the morning you go up to the bank and rent a safety box for a
year—it’s about four dollars.  Arrange with them to let any one into it
that brings a key. Tell them there will be nothing of value there, just
papers, and that you may want to send some one else after them and to
let any one open it who comes with the key—better get two keys. After
you get the box arranged for, come down, get the ‘dan’ and ‘stems’
(drills), and put them safely away in the box. When you get the receipt
for the box rent tear it up, throw the pieces away, and bring me the
keys. I’ll plant them here in this joint somewhere where I can find
them when I return.”

Johnnie laughed. “Sanc, are you going to plant that stuff in the ‘jug’?”

“Certainly, the bank will take good care of it and it won’t deteriorate.
I’m not going to carry the box key around on my watch chain and put the
receipt carefully away in my pocket. If I get snared by the bulls they
won’t know I’ve got a safety box unless I snitch on myself, and if I
were going to stay in this town my money would be in that box, too.”

When the bank opened next morning I rented the box and was given two
keys and a password, and was told that anybody bringing a key and the
password would have access to the box. “Even if it’s a Chinaman,” said
the attendant.

The receipt was destroyed, and the stuff, in a neat parcel, put in the
box. Sanc took the keys, planted them somewhere about the premises, and
buried the password in his fertile mind.

“Go down to the depot, kid, and get three tickets to Pocatello. We’ll
all stay uptown till the train is ready to pull out. No good hanging
around that depot, it’s lousy with bulls.”

Johnnie was a typical knight of the road. He believed that beds were for
sick people in hospitals, that room rent was wild extravagance, and
paying fare on the railroad nothing but ostentatious spending. He
protested.

“Sanc, you’re not going to start paying fare?”

“Yes, I am, and I’ll buy you a ticket to California if you’ll come. Just
look at the pleasure you would have beating your way from there back to
your home town in New Hampshire.”

“That’s the funny part of it,” said Johnnie. “My home town is twenty
miles off the railroad and I always have to pay fare on the stage going
in and out.”

Back at Pocatello we paid Mary the borrowed money, and spent some in her
place for interest. She gladly undertook to deliver the money we wanted
to go to our friends at the prison, and we gave it to her, capable woman
that she was, feeling as sure they would get it as if we were doing it
ourselves.

Mary bought or sold anything crooked. Johnnie paid her for a couple of
guns and gave her an address in Chicago to express them to. He could
have bought them cheaper there, but in the matter of buying guns he was
careful. Mary was square, and no matter what happened, she would not
talk.

“Be sure and get thirty-eight caliber, Mary,” he cautioned. “I won’t
have any off calibers or strange make of guns. I want the kind that
everybody else has. I don’t want to shoot anybody, but if I do they
won’t dig a forty-one caliber slug out of him and find a forty-one
caliber gun on me.”

We parted at Pocatello, agreeing to “weigh in” (meet) at Ogden in the
spring; Johnnie starting home, where he never arrived, and we to the
Coast.




CHAPTER XI


We arrived in San Francisco safely and without incident. The first thing
was to get rooms. My experience in the matter of Smiler inclined me
toward a room by myself. Sanc, always cautious, decided it would be
safest to have separate rooms. I found a nice, quiet German hotel in the
Mission where I located, and Sanc found himself a place downtown.  After
getting settled, Sanc took our paper money to a bank and got gold for
it.

At that time storekeepers hesitated about taking paper. Many of them did
not know good from bad paper, there was so little of it in circulation,
and they had been loaded up with Confederate bills till they were
suspicious of any paper and sometimes called in a copper to inspect it
and the person who proffered it. We didn’t want any of this thing, and
got gold at once.

“Now for another safety box,” said Sanc. “I would prefer the bank,
straight, but there’s too many formalities about putting it in and
getting it out, and besides that you can do a lot of locating if you
have a safety box. You can go in two or more times a day and you will
always see people going and coming to their boxes with money or jewelry.
Many women have all their jewelry in safety boxes and only take it out
when they want to display it at a theater or party. They lift it on the
afternoon of the evening they want to wear it, and put it back the next
morning, but they have to keep it at home that night. Simplest thing in
the world to tail them home from the bank.

“The safety box is also used,” he continued to illuminate me, “by
race-horse men, gamblers, and the moneyed macquereau, and I don’t mind
telling you that I’d rather ‘prowl’ one of them than any business man.
It’s a joy to hear one of them squawk, and most of them would put the
old index finger on you or me in a minute, just by the way of alibi.

“There is one bad objection to a safety box for a thief. The coppers are
beginning to get wise that they are the greatest receptacles of loot in
the world. They are loaded with stolen money, jewelry, bonds; and the
larger boxes are often used to store smuggled opium and other contraband
drugs. The coppers hang around them, doing a little locating themselves,
and if I were known in the town I wouldn’t think of having anything
crooked in one of them. I will pay for the box, and tell them I play
poker and may want to get money before or after banking hours, and that
you are to have access to it at any time.”

He got two keys and gave me one. “You can carry the key with you if you
want, kid. There’s nothing crooked in the box yet, but if there is later
on, and I hope there will be, you must plant it till you need it. And
here goes the receipt,” he said, tearing it to bits and giving them to
the wind.

“To-morrow, Kid, while we have plenty of coin, I want you to get a
couple of guns. Thirty-eights,” and he named a certain standard make.
“No other kind, remember. You heard what Soldier Johnnie said, and he
knew what he was doing. I suppose you’ll go to the first hardware store
for them, eh?” he said rather severely.

Those were the good, or bad, old days when any wild-eyed maniac could
rush into a hardware store or pawnshop with money enough and buy a gun,
guaranteed to kill a man a block away. They would take the number of it,
to be sure, in order to get witness fees if the gun worked properly.
To-day it’s a little more difficult to buy a gun in California. The
better stores will not sell them unless the purchaser has a permit. The
other stores, and they are quite numerous, take your money to-day for
the gun, and to-morrow you go to the store and get it.

“Oh, I don’t know, I might look around a bit,” I said. “How about
getting them in a hockshop?”

“That would be just the place, kid, if you were going to shoot a burglar
or stick-up man, but in this instance there’s a difference. I’ve been
carrying a gun around for ten years. Every time I fired it I was in the
wrong, legally speaking, see? I’ve been lucky enough so far not to have
killed anybody, and hope I never do, but you have to be careful just the
same. The hardware store has the number of every gun. The hockshop man
not only notes the number, but in most cases puts a mark on it for
future reference. Your hockshop man, kid, is the hangman’s handmaiden.

“You will get those guns in Chinatown at different places, one to-morrow
morning and one in the evening.  You have plenty of time, and the best
way to spend it is in taking precautions against trouble. The Chinks are
safe to do any kind of business with, buying or selling. They don’t
talk. I’ll show you the kind of place to go this evening. The guns you
will buy are probably stolen from some pig-iron dump (hardware store)
outside of the state, and come into the Chinks’ hands by such devious
routes that the numbers are long since lost track of.”

The guns and cartridges were duly bought and put away in the safety box
with most of our money. The keys we planted about the places where we
lived. Our clothes were few and in bad shape. Sanc proposed going to a
tailor.

“Yes,” I said. “Here’s where one of my ambitions comes to a head. I’m
going to have a nice gray suit, gray hat, and a fine leather trunk,” my
mind going back to the gray man and his traveled trunk that I worshiped
on the depot platform in my little town.  It seemed an age since then.

“If you dress yourself that way, Kid, we part.  Where did you gather
that insane notion? A gray suit, gray hat, leather trunk! I suppose
you’d have stickers on the trunk so the coppers wouldn’t have to ask you
where you were from.”

I was silent, ashamed to tell him where I got the notion.

“It’s just as I said about the guns; you might wear that rig if you were
out hunting burglars, but you wouldn’t get many. Even the ‘dicks’ have
too much sense to dress that way. Do you want everybody to look at you?
Do you want everybody that looks at you to remember you? You do not. You
want as few people to look at you as possible, and you want those few to
forget you as soon as possible,” he continued, with emphasis.

“What you want is clothes that will not detain the eye for a second.
Expensive as you like, and well fitting, but not loud or striking.
You want clothes that a man or woman could not describe as blue,
brown, or black five minutes after looking at you. You want neutral
clothes. Be as positive yourself as you like, but no positive clothes.
You’ve got to watch yourself, kid. You know that old maxim, ‘eternal
vigilance.’ You’ll have enough trouble come to you naturally and
unavoidably—accidents that you cannot foresee—without advertising for
it with a loud suit of rags. Ninety-nine men out of a hundred are
picked up through some peculiarity of dress and identified by the same.
You don’t want any funny hats, either, or loud ties.

“You know when you are doing things to people you depend largely on the
element of surprise. They do not look at you carefully and memorize your
features. They get a fleeting, frightened glance, and you are off. But a
red tie, Kid, a glance is enough, and no matter how surprised your party
may be he remembers your gray suit, gray hat, or red tie.”

The Sanctimonious Kid was a sober, careful character. He did not gamble
and keep us broke as poor Smiler had. We went along easily and got some
good out of our money. I spent days along the water front and in the
park and at the beach, and evenings at shows or in the dance halls,
watching the sailors, whalers, miners, lumbermen, spending their
winter-money in a night.

The night life fascinated me. Grant Avenue, now filled with the best
shops, was a part of the Tenderloin, and all the narrow streets or
alleys off it were crowded with cribs and small saloons with a dance
floor in the back room. Many of them had only the short, swinging doors,
and never closed from one year’s end to another. The Tenderloin was
saturated with opium. The fumes of it, streaming out of the Baltimore
House at the corner of Bush and Grant, struck the nostrils blocks away.
Every room in it was tenanted by hop smokers. The police did not molest
them. The landlord asked only that they pay their rent promptly. If it
was not paid on the hour, he took the door of the room off its hinges
and put it behind the counter, leaving the occupant’s “things” at the
mercy of his fellow lodgers.

Dupont Street, now Grant Avenue, began at Bush and carried the
Tenderloin over into Chinatown, where old St. Mary’s Church rose from
the heart of it, brooding over it all. It was a colorful
Tenderloin—loud, drunken, odorous, and stupid from hop. Its bad wine,
ill women, and worse song have gone to join the Indian, the buffalo, the
roulette wheel, and the faro box. Deeply and securely dug in, it yielded
slowly, inch by inch, and with scant grace, to the sledgehammer blows of
the militant Father Caraher.

I made a few acquaintances around the dance halls and found my way into
the hop joints. Curiosity was my only excuse for my first “smoke.” It
made me very sick, and although I became a “smoker” after, it was years
before I touched the pipe again.

Sanc spent his time in his own way, and there were times when I wouldn’t
see him for a week. One night when he appeared at our eating place, he
handed me a sheet of paper.

“Here’s some work for you, kid. There are the names and addresses of
about fifty people here and in Oakland who carry burglary insurance. It
cost me one hundred dollars. The lawyer who got it for me probably gave
the clerk who got it for him ten dollars.  It’s cheap though, at that,
for it will save me a lot of footwork, guesswork, and uncertainty. A
glance at that list tells you where they live, it tells you they have
valuables because they are insured, and it tells me that they are
careless because they are insured.  It also tells me that in case of a
show-down they will give up their valuables without a murmur because
they are insured. It further tells me that some of them are going to
collect insurance shortly, providing you get out and do your part of
it, and that’s this.

“I want you to look over some of those shacks.  To-morrow you copy off
about three names and plant that list somewhere around your hotel; then
go out and look over the places. Later I’ll look at any you think are
possible of approach. I want to know about dogs, kids, servants, sick
people—everything. The house, the porch, the basement, the yard, the
alley.

“You’ve read a lot of books about criminals, but forget it all. Don’t
scrape acquaintance with the nurse girl to ask questions. Don’t ask a
question in the neighborhood. Just walk by and look, or get a book or
paper and read where you get a good view of the house and its occupants.
Look at the porches especially. This is about the time of the year for a
good ‘supper sneak’; it’s dark when they are at dinner now.

“Take your time, and when you see one that looks tough, forget it. There
ought to be a few soft ones on that list. One good one would do.”

There was nothing of the Bill Sikes about Sanc.  He ordered me to do
things as a plumber would an apprentice. I took orders and obeyed them
as any apprentice should, cheerfully. I worked faithfully day after day,
reporting several places to Sanc, who took a look at them and said,
“Keep on going, Kid.”

At last I found a house that seemed to interest him. He looked at it and
told me to quit my search and turn my attention to the place for a few
evenings.  It was built to be burglarized. Big yard, trees, shrubs.
House of about ten rooms, two stories, porch in front and around one
side. It was on a corner lot and from the side street the family could
be seen, assembled at dinner.

We looked at it together for several evenings, and Sanc decided it would
do. “Ordinarily,” said he, “I would get this alone, but to-morrow night
you will come along. That old porch may not bear my weight.  If it
won’t, you will have to go up.”

The next evening we were in the yard when they gathered round the dinner
table. The upstairs was lighted as usual. Sanc left me in the shrubbery,
and stepped to the side porch and upon the railing. When he grasped the
upper part to lift himself, the whole structure groaned and creaked and
rocked. He tried another place and it was worse. He beckoned me.  “Up
you go, Kid. It won’t hold me. The front rooms first, remember. Take
your time; we have half an hour. I’ll protect you.”

I went up with ease and he back to the sheltering shrubs. The nearest
window was unfastened. I doubt if one of them was locked. I was nervous.
My heart was pounding with the suspense till I could hear it.  Sanc had
instructed me well. I was fortunate enough to get the long end of what
was there. It was on top of a dressing table. No money. The other rooms
were bare of valuables.

I was hanging from the top of the porch, feeling for a foothold on the
railing, when a pair of arms encircled me, and, thinking it was Sanc
helping me down, I said softly, preparing to let go my handholds, “Have
you got me?”

The arms tightened around my waist like iron bands, pinning me to the
porch post, helpless.

“Yes, damn you, I’ve got you good!” said a strange voice. “Oh, Clarence,
come out here. I’ve got a burglar, red-handed.”

Captured red-handed, as I was, my mind turned to Sanc. I could not
believe he had deserted me.  Another man joined my captor in response to
his call and they began tugging and hauling me, trying to break my hold
on the porch roof. I could see myself being beaten, mauled, despoiled of
my loot, and thrown into the patrol wagon by the two outraged and angry
citizens.

Just when I was ready to let go all holds and fall into their arms, I
felt the iron clasp of the one that had me around the body slacken
slowly. One of them exclaimed: “Look out!” Then I heard Sanc’s voice.
It was not clear and soft as usual. There seemed to be a slight
impediment or obstruction in his speech, which was positive enough but
so different that I doubted for a minute if it was he. His precise and
careful English was gone, too.

“Hey, youse, let go uh that guy or I’ll tear your heads off. Want to git
yourselves plugged over a bunch of junk dat’s insured? Git inside an’
stay there or I’ll smoke the both of youse off.”

My confidence came back, and I found a foothold on the porch rail. My
captors were backing slowly, silently toward the door they came out of.
Sanc, a fearsome object, his coat collar up, hat down over his ears and
eyes, stood in the shadow of a large bush six feet away, waving some
shiny thing at them. “Don’t try any funny business,” he said to them as
I jumped to the ground. “You might get us to-morrow but not to-night.
Phone your head off if you want, but don’t poke it out of the house
while we’re in the block.”

“Did you connect, Kid?” he asked when we were on the street.

“Yes, a coat pocket full,” I said, brushing the cobwebs and dust off my
clothes; “but why did you tell them to phone?”

“I’ll explain all that to you later. You’ve got to outthink them. You
have to have something besides guts at this racket. I sent them to the
phone so they wouldn’t follow us out. I couldn’t have stood them off on
the street with this bottle. I had to keep waving it about wildly for
fear they would see it wasn’t a gun. I found it right at my hand on the
porch, and it served the purpose,” he said, throwing it into a yard.  “I
seldom carry a gun at this evening work because I can flatten the
average man with a punch. However, I think I shall put a small ‘rod’ in
my coat pocket hereafter.”

We walked away briskly without attracting attention; it was early
evening and there were people in every block. At a corner I started to
turn toward downtown. He stopped me. “No, no; we must assume that they
phoned because they did not follow us. That way you might meet the
coppers on their way out.”

A short walk brought us to a car line. “Take this car, Kid, and go
straight to your room. I’ll be on the next one; and don’t lock your door
when you go in. It looks and sounds suspicious at seven o’clock in the
evening in a decent, quiet hotel.”

He came in ten minutes after me, without knocking, and locked the door
softly. “Now, kid,” he said in his best manner, “we will proceed to
estimate the intrinsic value of our takings in dollars and cents.  That
amount, divided by four, will give us an idea of what we have earned
this evening.”

“Why divide it by four, Sanc?”

“Because it’s crooked and no fence will give you more. It’s a great
game, Kid. The fence divides it by four, taking seventy-five per cent of
the value to pay him for the chances he takes. The loser, reporting to
the insurance company, multiplies it by four to pay himself for the
extrinsic value of his junk, and the annoyance caused by his burglar.”

He turned to the stuff I threw on the bed. “Better brush your clothes
off carefully, Kid. There are still some smudges on your coat.” He
looked at me critically. “And a button gone.” He pointed to where there
should have been a button. “Take that suit off. Put on your old one.
That button is around that porch and it’s enough to bury us both in
Quentin.  Tear the tailor’s tags out of those clothes, wrap them up, go
out, and throw them in a lot somewhere, not too close to this place.
To-morrow you can order a new suit. That one is poison. While you’re
out, I’ll take these stones out of their ‘harness.’”

It broke my heart to throw away a new suit of clothes, but I was a good
apprentice and obeyed.  When I returned he had finished “unharnessing”
the stones. There was a fistful of broken gold settings, and some small
articles of little value. “Wrap that junk up, kid, take it out and throw
it in a lot and not the same lot you left the clothes in, either,” said
the master.

I tore a sheet from a newspaper, and, wrapping the junk up, started out
again. He stopped me.  “Wouldn’t it be just as well to take the balance
of that paper and throw it away, Kid? Why leave it in the room? It fits
the piece you have in your pocket.  And be sure to throw that junk away.
Don’t plant it somewhere against a rainy day. Throw it away,” he
finished emphatically.

Again I obeyed. When I got back he had planted the stones, a very small
parcel now, in the hotel wash room. On our way out he said, “One more
thing now, and I will feel safe. We will get a new hat each.”

We left the old ones in the store, “to be called for.”

“Now, Kid, something to eat, and I will sum up for you the doings of
this evening.” Seated in a quiet restaurant with decent dinners before
us, Sanc began.

“You probably thought when you were seized coming down the porch that I
had abandoned you.”

I protested, “No, no.”

“Well, that’s what I would have thought if I had been in your place. You
see, I saw the party coming toward the door just as you were dropping
off the porch roof. I was afraid if I started anything then you would go
back up and get trapped inside the house.  So I let things go along
naturally till I thought they had gone far enough.”

“You did the right thing,” I said gratefully, “but why did you tell them
they might get us to-morrow?”

“Ha, that’s the psychology of the situation, Kid. I mentioned also that
he was insured. That reminds him that he is not losing anything, and it
also saves his face with the family. He went inside and said to them and
the other chap, after they had looked about the house and phoned the
police, ‘Oh, well, we’re insured. Of course if we hadn’t been I would
have given that other burglar a battle, tough as he was.’ Then the other
chap cuts in and says, ‘You did the sensible thing, Tom. The police will
pick them up to-morrow at some pawnshop.’

“You see, kid,” Sanc continued, “those people are excited and
frightened. You have to think for them and for yourself, too. When I
told them they might get us to-morrow I gave them another out; they say
to themselves, ‘Why, of course the police will get them. How foolish of
us to endanger ourselves and family over a few things that are insured
and will be recovered in the pawnshops when the burglars are arrested.’

“Then I send them to the phone, and we depart.”

I listened, spellbound. “You did something to your voice. I hardly
recognized it.”

“Simplest thing in the world. Put a fifty-cent piece or any little
object in your mouth and see what a difference it makes in your voice. I
venture to say that the loss of one tooth would cause a change that
might be detected with certain instruments for analyzing sound. It’s
just as well to take such precautions.  Some people have uncanny
memories for voices. And now we come to the last phase of the evening’s
work.  It hurt you to throw away your new suit. Don’t worry, it’s not
wasted. Somebody will find it and wear it, and maybe get arrested. But
this is no time for speculating about that. Suppose that button were
found on that porch or maybe in one of the rooms.  You might have lost
it going in the window upstairs.  It don’t belong in the house. The
presumption is that you lost it in the struggle or climbing up the
porch.

“Old Captain Lees (you’ve heard of him) would give that button to one of
his smart young ‘dicks’ and stand him on the Richelieu corner, Geary and
Market.

“He would stand there from four in the afternoon till midnight waiting
for you to come along, which you do every evening. Just think what might
happen to us then. He wouldn’t pinch you there. He would tail you to
your room, then to my room, then to the safety box, and when they got
ready in we would go.  Think that over.

“If the case were big enough, Lees would go through every tailor shop in
town fishing for a line on you, and he might stumble on it.

“The gold mountings you threw away could have been melted at the expense
of a fifteen-cent crucible and a dime’s worth of borax, and would have
brought us maybe ten dollars as old gold at any jeweler’s. But think of
the chances you take in selling it, jeopardizing the stones we have and
our liberty for ten dollars—bad business.

“And that newspaper I made you throw out.  Here’s the reason. We might
be in jail to-morrow on suspicion. We figure to get picked up any time
because, well, because we’re what we are. Everything in your room, if
they find your room, is taken down and held and examined. Suppose that
happened to-morrow and while you’re locked up the parcel of junk is
found in the lot wrapped in the missing part of the paper found in your
room. No lawyer in California could beat that case. That proves
possession and that’s all they need to convict you of burglary.  And
here’s something else about house burglary. You seldom get money.
Everything has to be sold. And that’s where your danger and troubles
begin in earnest.  Not one house burglar in a hundred is caught in the
act. It’s always when he is trying to sell his plunder.

“I could steal, take, and carry away,” he continued, smiling, “fifty
thousand dollars’ worth of plunder—rugs, furs, paintings, statuary, and
such junk in thirty days, if I wanted to make a pack horse of myself.
But just imagine trying to dispose of it. There’s where you ‘sup with
sorrow’ as the poet says, Kid.  Take nothing you can’t put in your coat
pocket.  You’ve got to watch yourself like a fat man on a diet.  The
smallest trifle will upset you, and you’ll have leisure to repent your
carelessness. When you get your new suit from the tailor’s, take all the
tags out of it, and when you buy a hat don’t let the hatter stamp your
name on the sweatband. You don’t know what house you might lose it in.

“I know thieves so conceited and foolish that they have their names in
their hats and monogrammed pocket handkerchiefs, and neat little
notebooks with all their friends’ addresses and phone numbers carefully
noted. That’s the type of thief that calls the police ‘a bunch of
chumps,’ and goes to jail crying, ‘Somebody snitched.’

“The police are not chumps, kid; they are just lazy, that’s all. If they
worked as thoroughly at their business as I do at mine, I don’t know
what would happen. They are human, and take the easy way.  Somebody
whispers to a dick. He whispers to me, and we go down to the jail, where
he locks me up ‘on suspicion.’ The next morning he and his partner come
to my cell, knock me down, walk up and down on my wishbone for a few
minutes, and ask me if I am ready to snitch on myself and all my
friends. If I decline to help them, they let me out. That’s the lazy
coppers’ notion of doing police duty.”

Our dinner finished, he said: “And now, after all this talk, what do you
think we should do with the stones we have?”

“Why not spend a hundred dollars for fare to Pocatello and back?” I
asked. “Mary’s safe.”

“You are learning, Kid. That’s precisely what I intended doing. Mary is
safe, and moreover she’ll give me more than I could get around here. The
expense of going to her is money spent insuring ourselves against
trouble. If I try to drop the stones here, I have to take what the first
man offers me or I make a dangerous enemy right there. If I refuse to be
robbed and turn down half a dozen offers, I make that many bad friends,
and they whisper me into jail. I could give them to some crooked saloon
man, who would sell them in an hour and pay me at the rate of five or
ten dollars a day, in the hope that before I got all the money I would
get pinched for something else, and put away where I couldn’t collect
the balance. If I get insistent and demand it all at once, he throws a
scare into me thus: ‘Say, now, what’re you trying to do, crowd somebody?
If I wanted to be wrong I could turn you in to the coppers and get a
favor of them some time. But I’m right.  Nevertheless, don’t try to
crowd me, see?’

“So I am for Salt Chunk Mary’s in the morning.  She’s righter than a
golden guinea and is entitled to make the profit on the junk. I’ll be
back in ten days.

“While I’m away take it easy and don’t go around the residence district
at all. You can make the safety box about ten o’clock in the morning and
four in the afternoon every day. You might locate something from there.
Here’s something else you can do.

“Every afternoon go into some good hotel and pay for a room for the
night. Register from out of town.  When you get the key, go out to your
own room and make a duplicate of it. Mark your duplicate so you can
identify it, and plant it somewhere. Most of the best places are using
these spring locks now and you can’t do anything without a key when
there’s a sleeper in the room. In a week you’ll have keys to half a
dozen good transient rooms in the best hotels, and I might get some real
money out of them.

“Go back to the hotel in the evening, tell the clerk you are called out
of town and ask for your money back. He will usually give it to you.”

I bade Sanc good night and good-by, resolving to have something good
located for him on his return from Salt Chunk Mary’s.




CHAPTER XII


During Sanc’s absence I worked industriously, bettering his instructions
by renting two rooms a day and making the duplicate keys. In most
instances the clerks returned my money when I told them I was called
away and could not occupy the rooms. My days were well filled with work,
renting two rooms, making two keys, trying to get my room money refunded
and visiting the safety box twice a day, sometimes following a depositor
out and around the streets to see what he did with his money.

My evenings were my own and I spent them on the Barbary Coast or the
water front. With an old suit on and a dollar or two in silver I loved
to go to the sailors’ boarding houses where seafaring men, brawny,
brown, and tattooed, speaking all languages, ate, drank, fought, sang
their strange sea songs, and told tales of hardship and adventure on all
the seas. Here I learned to beware the crafty shanghaier with his
knockout drops, lying in wait for strong young fellows from the country.
The cowardly and unscrupulous thieves who later used chloral so
indiscriminately and murderously learned its stupefying effects from the
busy shanghaier on San Francisco’s water front.

The wine dumps, where wine bums or “winos” hung out, interested me.
Long, dark, dirty rooms with rows of rickety tables and a long bar
behind which were barrels of the deadly “foot juice” or “red ink,” as
the winos called it. Sometimes the dump was equipped with a small lunch
counter in the back where the winos could buy for a nickel a big plate
of something that looked like stew, and a hunk of stale bread.  The stew
was served from a big pot that was always boiling. Several times a day
the porter, who was also cook and waiter and wino as well, threw a box
of mixed vegetables, discarded from the commission houses, unwashed and
unpeeled, into the pot. Then followed a box of bones, pieces of tallow,
scraps of meat trimmings, odds and ends of meat covered with sawdust
from the floor of the market near by.

The patrons of the wine dumps were recruited from every walk of life.
Scholars, quoting Greek and Latin poets, lawyers dissecting Blackstone,
writers with greasy rolls of manuscript fraternized with broken bums
from the road, sailors too old for the sea, and scrapped mechanics from
the factories—all under the lash of alcohol. They sat in groups at the
tables drinking the wine, alcohol in its cheapest and deadliest form,
from every conceivable kind of vessel: tin cans, pewter mugs, beer
glasses, steins, and cracked soup bowls—anything unbreakable that the
boss could buy from a junkman. They talked volubly. They seldom laughed
and never fought—too far gone for laughing or fighting. When they could
drink no more or buy no more, they staggered or crawled to a bare space
on the floor in the back of the room where they lay on their backs in a
row with their heads to the wall, each with his hat over his hideous,
bloated, purple face. The porter-cook-wino watched the sleepers
carefully. When he thought they had “slept it off” enough to stand up,
he roughly kicked them to their feet and herded them out into the
streets to beg, borrow, or steal enough small silver for another bout.
Too often they failed to respond to his kicks; he would lift the
battered hat, take one look at the purple-blue face, and ring for the
morgue wagon.

This pitiful crew, gathered from the four corners of the earth and from
every stratum of society, whipped beyond resistance by that mysterious
and irresistible craving for alcohol, drank themselves purple in the
wine dumps and died on the floors or under the city sidewalks. The wine
dumps are gone; can any man regret their passing? And so are the winos
gone.  In their places have appeared the Jamaica ginger fiend, the
canned heat and wood alcohol drinker. It is difficult to study and
classify them; their lives are too short.

The most disreputable wine dump in the city was in Clay Street, below
Kearny, and I never failed to visit it when in the neighborhood. I had
no more than stepped into the place one night when a wino at the door
shouted, “Here comes the wagon,” and dashed out wildly. Some of the
soberest ran out the back and disappeared. I started to the front door,
but the cops were coming in. I was the first one they got, and as the
cop threw me into the wagon, in the middle of my explanation, he said:
“Oh, tell the judge about it, I’m no court. I’m a hundred-dollar-a-month
cop, and it serves me right for being one if I get lousy throwing all
you wine bums in and out of the wagon.” He seemed discouraged.

I had got calloused about getting locked up and didn’t worry, knowing
they couldn’t do much to me.  But going over in the wagon my mind turned
to the burglary of the week before. I felt uncomfortable and thought of
my room and was thankful that it was “clean,” and of the safety box and
the keys I had made, and every other crooked transaction in my short
life of outlawry. “No danger,” I thought as the wagon rattled over the
blocks, “if I cover myself up. My name is William Brown, I am nineteen
years old. I was born in Pocatello, Idaho. My parents died when I was
fourteen. I have supported myself since, selling papers, washing dishes,
and working on farms.  I came to this city this morning and am going to
get a job. I went into that place out of curiosity.”

I just had this short biography put together when we got to the city
prison. It was in the basement of a building that stood where the Hall
of Justice now is, and it was the foulest I ever saw, worse than the
first one at home. There was a busy spot, that corridor in the city
prison! Officers hurrying in and out, lawyers haggling at the desk about
releases for prisoners, “fixers,” hawk-eyed and rapacious, lurked about,
cheap bail bondsmen coining misery, ignorance, and crime into thick
nickels and thin dimes, and on the long bench by the wall sat a thin,
wrinkled, poorly dressed woman of fifty, holding a boy’s hand in hers.
He sat beside her, silent and stubborn. She was crying.

Ten of us from the wine dump were lined up at the desk. The officer in
charge said to the man at the desk. “We’ll vag the chronics and charge
the new ones with drunk.” The chronic winos gave their names, etc., and
were hurried away down the corridor. Another chap and I were the only
“new ones.” We answered all questions without angering anybody and
getting knocked down. I protested that I wasn’t drunk. The desk man
said: “Oh, that’s all right, you can go out in the morning at five
o’clock on the broom.” They searched me, but took nothing except a
pocketknife.

We were put in a large cell about twenty feet square, directly across
the corridor from the desk where prisoners were received and registered.
The front of this cell was of upright iron bars and admitted plenty of
light from the corridor. The cell was foul smelling from a fixture in
one corner that seemed to connect directly with a sewer. A broken water
faucet leaked continually, with a hissing sound. About ten men were
there, some sleeping on the damp asphalt floor, some on the benches that
lined the wall; some stood expectantly at the front waiting to be
released, others squatted on their haunches in the corners, staring
vacantly at the floor.

I sat on the bench and wondered about “going out on the broom” in the
morning. I could have asked my cellmates. I looked for the other “new
one” that came with me from the wine dump; he was asleep on the floor. I
decided not to ask, but to wait till morning and find out for myself.
Even at that age I had stumbled upon one truth, and that is, The best
way to get misinformed is to ask a lot of questions.  Nearly all my life
has been spent in the company of unfortunate people, and while I never
looked upon myself as an unfortunate, I was always accepted as one of
them. Whatever knowledge I have of them was gleaned by looking and
listening, and it is much more accurate than any I could have got by
asking impertinent and close-up questions. Your best friend would give
you a surly answer if you were to ask him the time of day an hour after
his watch had been stolen. Ask any one-legged stranger how he lost his
limb, and you will get something like this: “Well, you see, it was this
way—I got run over by a ferryboat.”

Of all the many friends I have made since I gave up my larcenous life,
“Shorty” is one of the most respected and highly prized. His friends are
legion, and in every state in the Union; not that Shorty has traveled
there and made friends of them, but that they have traveled here and
made a friend of him.

Shorty’s news stand is on a busy corner in the shadow of a skyscraper
owned by ex-Senator Phelan, one of California’s most distinguished men,
and there, under his patronage and protection, he stands on his stumps
(“cut-down legs” he calls them), early and late, serving thousands with
papers and periodicals. He hobnobs with doctors, lawyers, business men,
and politicians. He finds lost children and dogs, and returns them to
their owners. Shopgirls and strangers ask him which is the best show of
the week. Men around town consult him about the chances of a horse in
to-morrow’s race. He can borrow more money on his I.O.U.  than many
business men in his block and pays on the minute. He is no stranger at
the banks on the opposite corners. His reputation for truth and veracity
is such that if he were to tell me the water had all disappeared from
the bay I wouldn’t go down to look.

Traveling in search of adventure when young, he lost his legs under a
train, but instead of despairing and sinking under this terrible
misfortune, he braced himself and, picking out a bare corner on the
street, built up, day by day, year by year, a business that has made him
independent and respected. I stopped one day at his stand, and, looking
at his massive chest, broad shoulders, and fine head, I saw him in fancy
a splendid figure of a man towering ruggedly above his fellows.

“Shorty,” I asked, “how tall were you before you lost your legs?”

He flashed me a savage look; then remembering we were friends his eyes
fell to his stumps and he said with a laugh, “Oh, I was taller by two
feet.”

That’s all one gets by asking questions that wake painful memories.

From my position on the bench I could see every prisoner brought to the
desk. About ten o’clock there was a stir in the hall and several
policemen came in with Chinamen from a gambling-house raid. This was
before they had cut off their queues, and instead of handcuffing their
prisoners the cops came in driving the silent, stolid Chinese before
them like charioteers.  Each cop had the tails of three Chinamen’s
queues in each hand. Ahead of the procession walked a white man with a
heavy bag of gold in his hand which he put on the desk, and waited till
the names of the prisoners had been taken. Then they all went back up
the corridor out of my sight—the Chinamen back to Chinatown to their
gambling, and the bag of gold into the bond-and-warrant clerk’s office
to insure their appearance in court.

Several times during the night men were brought in, questioned at great
length, searched thoroughly, and led away to another part of the
prison—felony cases. About midnight two young fellows about my age were
brought in by a copper and stood up before the desk.

“Vag these two ‘hypos,’” said the cop to the desk man. He searched them
most carefully, finding a small package in the torn lining of one’s
coat. The boy begged for it piteously. “I’ll croak, officer, if you take
it away from me.” The cop gave him to the waiting trusty. “Throw him
in.” He was put in with us. Nothing was found on the other hypo, and he
was “thrown in” too.

They immediately began comparing notes and taking stock, walking up and
down the center of the cell nervously. They were in rags and unwashed,
their shoes were broken and had no laces, and the tops flapped open
showing their bare ankles. They seemed utterly unconscious of their sad
condition and walked and talked as briskly as two brokers on Montgomery
Street discussing the markets.

“He got my plant, Georgie,” said the first one, “but you saved yours,
didn’t you, Georgie? Gee, Georgie, but you’re a fox.” His tones were
honey.

“Never mind that,” the other replied; “you don’t have to ‘Georgie’ me.
You’re in with what ‘gow’ I’ve got. Let’s bang it up before they come in
and take it away from us. See if you can hustle some matches.”

The match seeker glanced sharply around him.  When his eye fell on me I
produced some matches.  “Got any smokes?” I handed him a pack of
cigarettes. He took two, gave one to his partner, Georgie, and returned
the pack. His mind seemed detached from the cell. He took the matches
and cigarettes from me without a word, as if he had reached up to a
mantel and taken them off it. Georgie fished about the front of his
trousers and brought up a tobacco sack that had been hanging suspended
from a button.  The sack contained his “plant,” an eye dropper with a
hypodermic needle soldered to it with sealing wax, and a small paper of
morphine in a little tin box.

They went to a back corner of the cell and prepared their shot. About a
spoonful of water and some of their meager store of “morph” were put in
the tin box and matches were burned under it till it boiled, completely
dissolving the morphine. It was then drawn up into the eye dropper, and
Georgie injected his portion into his arm. The other boy did the same
with his portion. Their outfit was carefully put away in the tobacco bag
and suspended again from a button down inside the front of Georgie’s
trousers. Nobody paid any attention to them. They took their shot as
coolly as if they had been in their room, or under a sidewalk. They
seemed a little more interested in their surroundings in a few minutes.
The one I gave the cigarettes to came over to me rubbing his hands
briskly, smiling.

“Give us a couple more of them smokes, young fellow.”

“I’d like to buy some,” I said, “if I could.”

“Got money?”

“Yes, a couple of dollars.”

“I’ll fix it for you,” he said most condescendingly.  He went over to
the bars and shouted, “Hey, Finnerty!”

In a minute the head trusty, a thin, weazened, rat-eyed, undersized
character, came up.

“Cigarettes, matches? Sure. Anything else?”

I produced a dollar.

“What’s the matter with a can of coffee and some snails?” said the hypo.

“Get whatever you can,” I said, giving him the dollar.

Finnerty disappeared, and in a surprisingly short time came back with
cigarettes, a gallon fruit tin half full of splendid coffee, and a bag
of snails. The two young fellows took charge of the coffee and snails,
spread a newspaper on the floor, and very cordially invited me to help
myself.

While we were having our lunch the talk was diplomatically turned to
dope and the shortage that menaced my two hypo friends and the
sufferings they would undergo when there was no more and the “habit”
came on, and the necessity for a shot in the morning as a bracer for
them when they faced the judge. They grew so despondent over their
plight that when we were done eating they decided to “shoot up” the
small portion of white stuff they had left.  They brightened up after
this operation was over, and things looked rosier.

“Just think, Georgie,” said the talkative one, looking at me, “what a
four-bit piece would do for us.  What a life-saver! We’ll both get a
‘sixer’ in the morning if we go in front of the judge with our teeth
rattlin’ so we can’t put up a talk. If I had a decent shot for the
morning I could talk him out of it.

“And that rat, Finnerty, the trusty,” the talker spoke to me now, “has
got a ton of it out there to sell, but he wouldn’t give us a jolt if we
had the horrors.”

“Can you buy it from Finnerty?” I asked him, interested.

“Can you? Why, that guy Finnerty would peddle you a six-shooter and a
road map if you had the coin, and then snitch on you to the desk
sergeant, the rat,” he finished.

At that time morphine and opium were almost as cheap as tobacco. Fifty
cents’ worth would last them a day. I hastily dug up a half dollar and
gave it to him. In answer to his call Finnerty appeared, took the half
dollar, and from his shirt pocket drew a bundle of neatly folded packets
of morphine. In plain sight of the desk sergeant he counted out the
required number of parcels and put them into the purchaser’s hand
extended through the bars. They were divided at once.

Georgie said to his partner. “I think we’d better cook up a shot just to
see if the stuff is all right. That Finnerty would peddle you chloride
of lime if he happened to run out of ‘morph.’” This seemed to be a very
rational reason for taking another shot, and they did.

Given a sufficient quantity of hop, no fiend is ever at a loss for a
sound reason for taking a jolt of it.  If he is feeling bad he takes a
jolt so he will feel good.  If he is feeling good, he takes one to make
him feel better, and if he is feeling neither very bad nor very good he
takes a jolt “just to get himself straightened around.”

Along about two in the morning a young chap about twenty was brought in
to the desk. While he was being searched the two hypos had their eyes
glued on him. “He ain’t got a dime,” said Georgie to his partner when
the searching was done. The desk man gave the young fellow his
cigarettes and he was locked in with us. He was neat, well dressed, and
very wise looking. He sniffed at the hypos, gave me half a glance,
adjusted his tie, and polished his shoes by rubbing each foot on the
back of the opposite leg.  He hung a cigarette on his lower lip and felt
about for matches, but found none.

“Hey, you,” snapping his fingers at Georgie, “gimme a match.” Georgie
gave him a few. “I’ll be out of here in an hour,” said the newcomer,
inhaling his smoke. “I’ll send you in anything you want.  I’m a quick
connector. I can get a ten-dollar piece before I get out of the
block—sucker born every minute, you know.”

“Yes, I know,” Georgie replied. “I’m sorry for them poor suckers.
They’re all asleep down in the Palace Hotel and you’re up here in the
can begging matches. There’s one born every minute, all right, but
there’s two wise guys going to jail every minute, an’ beggin’ matches.”

The wise guy said no more, but stood by the door waiting to go out. He
was standing there when I left in the morning.

Georgie turned to his companion. “That last shot didn’t hit me right;
we’d better cook up another an’ begin to get straightened up for court.”

Having bought the stuff for them, I took the liberty to sit by while
they took their shot, which they did without seeming to notice me. Their
bony arms were gray, like pieces of petrified wood. The skin was pocked
with marks, mottled and scarred from the repeated, hourly stabbing of
the needle. Their shirt sleeves were encrusted with dried blood from the
many punctures. And yet they appeared oblivious to it all.

“Have a little shot, young fellow?” Georgie asked cordially.

I declined. “What would happen to me if I did?” I asked.

“Why, nothing; you’d lie down on the bench and sleep like a baby till
time to go out in the morning, that’s all.”

“Yes! And what would happen to the balance of my silver while I am
sleeping like a baby?”

Georgie’s partner cut in like a flash: “This is what would happen. Me
and Georgie would stick right here by you and see that nobody frisked
you for it.”

I laughed so loud that the desk officer thinking some one had gone
hysterical, stood up sleepily and peered over his desk into the cell.
The other bums stirred uneasily in their sleep. Mine was the only laugh
there that night. I could laugh then; I didn’t know anything about hop.

My companions didn’t seem hurt or offended because of my intimation that
they had designs on my last four-bit piece. They fell to discussing
their case and preparing a talk for the judge in the morning.  Georgie
was for pleading guilty, and his chum wanted to “talk the judge out of
it.” They couldn’t agree, and looked at me. I ventured to ask what they
had done.

“We’ve got two tough raps,” said Georgie. “In the first place a hypo
ain’t supposed to be found within a block of police headquarters, an’
we’re grabbed right alongside of the building. In the second place, a
hypo ain’t allowed to leave Chinatown. Of course the cops know we sneak
out. That ain’t so bad. Our racket is peddling kindling wood to the
Chinks an’ we’ve got to go out of Chinatown to get it. Last night we
ducks out and down Jackson Street to the commission houses and gather up
a couple of fine bindles of wood. They are pretty heavy and we’re on
short rations of gow and don’t feel any too strong, so we decide to dash
up Washington Street, the shortest route into Chinatown.  We’re bang up
against the city prison when a big, flat-footed, harness bull steps out
an’ yaffles us—an’ here we are.”

Their case looked so tough that I could think of no solution. “I
wouldn’t plead guilty to anything if I were you,” I advised him.

“Me, neither,” said his partner. “If I get six months they’ll have to
hang them on me. I ain’t going to reach out an’ grab them.”

They fell into a fresh argument and their words became so personal and
threatening that I feared they would do each other some great violence.
I took a chance in the rôle of peacemaker and suggested that they take
another shot and talk it over peaceably and quietly. They quit their
wrangling instantly and in a minute they were on their knees in the
corner of the cell with their heads together, amicably preparing another
shot. Somewhere down the corridor I heard a clatter, and a singsong
voice droned, “Get ready for the broom. Get ready for the broom.”

I was going out. I went over to my friends in the corner with the
fifty-cent piece I had left. “Here,” I said, “take this.” One of them,
still on his knees waiting for his shot, held out his hand; his fingers
closed on the half dollar. He neither looked up nor spoke to me—his eyes
were on the little tin can where the morphine was dissolving in the
boiling water.

The door was opened and my name called.

I stood by the door till a trusty prisoner opened it and let me out. My
partner from the wine dump was also taken out and we joined four or five
others in the corridor. A trusty came with an armful of brooms and gave
each of us one. A husky young fellow, half awake, reached for one of the
newest brooms.  “No, you don’t,” said the trusty, “the last time you
were here I gave you a good new broom and you beat it up to Chinktown
and peddled it for a dime. An old broom for you.”

We were detailed in pairs to sweep the sidewalks clean all around the
block the prison stood on. My space was from the prison door down to
Montgomery Street. An old man had the sidewalk across the street from
me. Two or three assistant trusties nosed around like bird dogs to see
that we swept clean and didn’t run away with the brooms. When my task
was done I helped the old man finish his, and he carried my broom back
to the prison. The trusty dismissed me with a wave of his arm and I went
up Montgomery Street in search of a restaurant where I could get some
coffee with a dime I had saved from the rapacious and cunning hypos in
the prison. I decided to keep away from the wine dumps in future, and
out of the hands of the police vag detail that rounded up the riffraff
when they got too numerous and pesty.

In a few days Sanc was back, quite satisfied with his trip to Salt Chunk
Mary’s. The money was split and put in our box in separate parcels. We
had more than $1,000 each now, but he had no notion of taking a rest or
vacation. He wanted to know right away what I had done in his absence. I
reported everything, including my night in jail. He asked me what I told
the police at the station. I told him. “Not bad,” he said, “but be
careful.”

I gave him the hotel room keys I had made, and he complimented me on my
work and put them away for future use.




CHAPTER XIII


Having plenty of time and spending money I visited San Jose, towns down
the peninsula, and across the bay—always with an eye to business.
Jewelry-store windows are fascinating to the thief. He must stop and
look over the sparkling plunder. Even in these days of my regeneration I
stop occasionally from habit at a jewelry-store window. Usually there
are others looking, too!

I paused before a jewelry-store window in Oakland one evening, just at
closing time. The clerks were clearing it out for the night. In the
center of the display stood a slim, polished wood pedestal, on top of
which, in a velvet cup, reposed an enormous ruby, the size of my thumb
nail, set in a ring. A placard announced that this pigeon-blood ruby,
valued at three thousand dollars, was to be awarded by some
organization, the name of which I don’t recall, to the winner of a
contest they were holding.

The window was cleaned up, the display put away for the night, but the
ruby was left on its pedestal when the store was closed. I got the next
boat across and found Sanc. We went back to Oakland and got to the store
about eleven o’clock.

“I don’t know anything about rubies, kid, but if it’s left there all
night it’s phony.”

Just then two men came along, entered the store, and, locking the door
behind them, went to the window and got the stone. They disappeared
toward the back of the store.

“It must be genuine, kid. They are putting it away in the ‘box.’”

As we walked away, Sanc said: “The window has a burglar alarm. You can
see the tape around the edges. If I could devise some way to put an inch
hole through the glass without cracking it clear across to the tape, the
alarm would not sound and I could take the stone out with a stiff wire.
To-morrow night I’ll try something I have long thought of.”

The next day he bought at a second-hand store a small machinist’s
hammer, weighing about a pound.  One face of it was thick, heavy, and
flat, the other was rounded to a nose about the size of a boy’s marble.
He bought a whipstock of tough, springy wood and made a handle about
eighteen inches long, which he fitted into the hammer.

For several nights we went around to new buildings and into deserted
streets where there were plate-glass windows of a weight corresponding
with the one in Oakland. Sanc used his hammer like a whip, snapping the
noselike face of it against windows till he became so expert he could
make a hole as clean as if it had been done by a bullet, and without
cracking the glass for more than six inches from it.

“Vandalism, they will call it,” he said after destroying probably five
hundred dollars’ worth of glass, “but in reality it is a scientific
experiment and a success.” The impact of the hammer sounded very much
like the breaking of a piece of kindling wood under foot. At last we
were ready, and Sanc, as usual, gave me final instructions.

“Oakland is a tough town to take a pinch in, kid.  You can’t fix your
case, and you’ll get the limit if convicted. I’ll take a gun along. You
needn’t. There isn’t much you can do. When the bull is out of the block
and pedestrians are a couple of doors away I will do the best I can. You
stand near by and if anybody gets wise to me, you shout to him: ‘Look
out, he’s got a gun. Let’s get a policeman!’”

At nine o’clock we passed the window. A crowd was admiring the ring. At
ten the pedestrians had thinned out, and half an hour later Sanc’s
chance came.

The store was in the middle of a block. The patrolman was at the corner
going farther away.  Everything was exactly right. A passing electric
car swallowed the noise of the breaking glass. Sanc disengaged the
hammer’s nose from the hole carefully with a rasping noise. The hammer
went into his coat pocket, and the wire came from beneath his coat. The
top of the pedestal where the ruby rested was higher than the hole in
the window, and when Sanc lifted the ring on his wire it slid slowly
down and out into his hand. He threw the wire into the street and walked
away. I followed behind and overtook him at the corner. A few blocks
farther away he tossed the hammer into a lot. We sat apart on the train
to the ferry and on the boat across to the city.

In my room Sanc removed the ruby from its setting, which I immediately
took out and threw into a near-by sewer opening. When I returned he was
admiring the stone. “There’s a stone, kid, that, as Shakespeare says, ‘A
Jew would kiss and an Infidel adore.’”

The Sanctimonious Kid’s face wore a serious look the next evening when
we met to go to dinner. “Kid,” he said, “the more I think of this
wonderful pigeon-blood ruby the less I think of it, if you understand
what I mean. It is possible that we put too much faith in the integrity
of the business firm that displayed it so carelessly. I was out to the
park to-day and gave the thing a careful inspection in the sunlight, and
there is a cold, clammy suspicion in my mind that we have been
swindled—in short, I am afraid the thing is a rank phony.

“And the worst of it is there’s not one person in five thousand who
knows a real ruby when he sees it.  There are probably three men in San
Francisco who would know, but they are all square business men and we
can’t submit it to any of them. The next nearest man is the buyer for
the big Mormon store, Zion’s Co-operative Mercantile Institution, at
Salt Lake City. I will take a run back there with it and get some one to
have him give an opinion on it. If it’s genuine I can get a thousand
dollars on it. I’ll be gone about two weeks, and this is what I want you
to do while I am away.

“Put on your best clothes, keep clean and neat, and spend your evenings
around the Diamond Palace in Montgomery Street. Go through the whole
block on both sides of the street. Look into every hallway, basement,
empty store, and saloon. Try to locate some place that we can go through
and out into an alley or another street. The getaway’s the thing, and if
you can find one in the block we’ll chance the Diamond Palace some
evening, maybe Christmas Eve.”

He left next morning after giving me strict orders to keep away from the
wine dumps and attend to business. I worked faithfully and soon found
half a dozen places that would serve. My time was now my own, and once
more I began exploring the byways of the city.

The hypos I spent the night with in the city prison had aroused my
curiosity about Chinatown. I put in many nights prowling through the
alleys watching these mysterious people gambling, smoking opium, and
trafficking in their women slaves. There were rumors of strange,
mysterious underground passages below the streets and under the
buildings, but I never saw them and I have since come to doubt whether
they ever existed.

The spots most favored in Chinatown by the hypos and small beggars were
the “cook ovens,” places built in back of Chinese lodging houses where
the occupants did their cooking on the community plan. There were warm
places around the ovens to sleep in, and always a bite to eat for the
asking—no Chinaman refuses to feed a hungry man.

In my experience with the Chinese I have found them charitable, frugal,
thrifty, moral, and honest.

In speaking of the cook ovens I may say that it was there the word
“yegg” originated. It has not yet been locked in the dictionary, but it
has a place in our language and it’s about time its derivation was
settled once and for all. It is a corruption of “yekk,” a word from one
of the many dialects spoken in Chinatown, and it means beggar. When a
hypo or beggar approached a Chinaman to ask for something to eat, he was
greeted with the exclamation, “yekk man, yekk man.”

The underworld is quick to seize upon strange words, and the bums and
hypos in Chinatown were calling themselves yeggmen years before the term
was taken out on the road and given currency by eastbound beggars. In no
time it had a verb hung on it, and to yegg meant to beg.

The late William A. Pinkerton was responsible for its changed meaning.
His business consisted largely of asking questions and necessarily he
acquired much misinformation. A burglar with some humor fell into
Pinkerton’s hands and when asked who was breaking open the country
“jugs” he whispered to the detective that it was the yeggs.
Investigation convinced Pinkerton that there were a lot of men drifting
about the country who called themselves yeggs. The word went into a
series of magazine articles Pinkerton was writing at the time and was
fastened upon the “box” men. Its meaning has since widened until now the
term “yegg” includes all criminals whose work is “heavy.”

Sanc returned in a very hostile frame of mind.  “We’ve been bilked, kid.
It was a French imitation.  Been on the market ten years. I sold it to
Tom Dennison, who runs the Wasatch gambling house in ‘The Lake,’ for a
hundred and fifty dollars, just enough to pay expenses. If you locate a
few more capers like that you’ll put us in the poorhouse.”

I reported my findings in Montgomery Street, and Sanc after looking them
over carefully pronounced two of the getaways feasible.

“Kid,” he said, “I read in the papers some time ago that a man named
Charlie Rice, in New York City, put on a cheap, black alpaca coat, put
his cap in his pocket, and with a pencil on his ear walked into a bank
and behind the counter where there were twenty clerks at work.
Unnoticed, he picked up twenty-five thousand dollars in bank notes and
walked out.

“That suggested to me that I can walk into this jewelry store some
evening before Christmas when they will have an extra force of clerks
employed, and go behind the counter if I am dressed like a clerk.  If I
can get behind a counter you can surely get in front of it. I will put a
tray of stones out for your inspection, and you will walk out with it.
We will go over it carefully now.

“I will walk into the place about seven o’clock some evening, dressed in
a black suit, white shirt, high collar, and black tie. You will go in
directly behind me. You will carry a harmless-looking parcel that looks
like a box of handkerchiefs neatly wrapped and tied. There will be no
bottom in it. I will walk to the back of the store where there are two
or three settees for patrons and visitors. You will stroll about near
by.  I will leave my derby hat and overcoat on a settee and try, mind
you, try to get behind the main counter. I am depending upon the fact
that the place will be full of visitors and customers and that there
will be a number of strange clerks and that no one clerk will know all
the others.

“You will follow my movements closely. When I get behind the counter I
will take out the best tray I can get and set it on the show case in
front of you.  You will put your bottomless package over the tray, pick
it up, put it under your arm, and walk out. We have two weeks to get
ready. We will go down there separately and look the place over for a
week. When you go in, you rehearse the thing in your mind and don’t
think of anything else for the next ten days.”

We thought and talked of the Diamond Palace only for days and days.
“Kid,” said Sanc, “I heard ‘Rebel George’ who invented the gold-brick
swindle say: ‘The way to sell a brass brick is to bunko yourself first
into the belief that your brick is solid gold—the rest is easy. The most
successful bunko man is the one who bunkoes himself before he goes after
a sucker.’

“I am going to hypnotize myself into the belief that I am a clerk in
that store from the minute I take my hat off till I put it on. You are a
visitor from the minute you go in till you get your hands on the stones;
then, presto, you are what you are. If we can get one of the larger
trays of stones we can get enough money on them to go to Salt Lake or
Denver, and open a small gambling house where, while we can’t be
entirely respectable, we can at least be secure. I am at a stage where I
would like to quit. I don’t feel like going to work as a laborer at two
dollars a day, or as a clerk for fifteen a week. I’m not speaking
disparagingly of them, mind you—fact is, they have more real courage
than we have, working for such wages. But this life of ours breeds
expensive habits of loose, careless spending that are hard to overcome,
and even if I could swallow my objections to being exploited I would
still find it impossible to survive on the pay.

“I didn’t jump into this life I’m leading as I jump into bed, and I
can’t get out of it in one jump. I drifted in by slow degrees, and if I
get out I’ll have to ease out of it by slow stages. A gambling joint
would be the first step away. Then maybe something better after that.
This can all be threshed out later; we must not let our minds stray from
the Diamond Palace.”

Sanc’s philosophy stood up under our bad luck with the near-ruby. “Kid,”
he said later, “this is the season of peace on earth and good will to
men. Who gives to the poor lends to the Lord, but when I give anything
to the poor I am going to have a better motive.  However, we are not
givers; we are takers, and our taking should be reasoned out rationally.
We will reverse this ‘giving and lending.’ We will rob the rich and
discomfit the devil; thereby, perhaps, finding favor in the sight of the
Lord. And this brings us to the front door of the Diamond Palace. It’s
one of the city’s show places and visitors are always welcome. We will
visit it.”

And we did. Separately, we made several visits in the evening to
familiarize ourselves with the inside, and to locate the trays of
stones. At night in my room Sanc drew diagrams of the interior and the
show cases. We rehearsed the thing in detail night after night. He made
a neat dummy parcel and drilled me in placing it over an imitation tray
of diamonds; showed me how to place it under my arm securely yet
carelessly and walk out of the store with entire nonchalance.

He bought his black suit, white shirt, and black tie, put them on and
rehearsed his part. We put our rooms in order, cleaning out everything
that might look suspicious, protecting ourselves against a possible
“pinch.” The hotel keys I had made were put away carefully against a
rainy day—or night. Our money was taken from the safety box, changed
into bank notes, and secreted in our clothes.

I asked him about the guns. “No gun for you, Kid.  You might get
nervous. Leave yours somewhere.  I’ll take mine along.”

Christmas was ten days away. Every evening we dressed for our parts, got
barbered, shined, and slicked up, and walked about the block prepared to
go into the store when it looked right. We made sure every day that the
getaways I had located were still open.

“I could make it now,” said Sanc as we stood across the street the third
evening, “but I’ll wait; it’s getting better every day.”

His last instructions were: “Now, don’t get nervous. If you get your
hands on the ‘junk’ walk out quietly and away. If they ‘tumble’ me up
before I get the tray out you fade away. I’ll do the best I can alone.
If there’s a ‘tumble’ after you get the tray and you are chased, hang on
to it and get into one of the spots you have picked out and when you get
on the other street don’t run; walk briskly direct to the room. If I’m
not there five minutes after you, I’ll be in jail. I don’t like to think
of that, but the pitcher can go to the well once too often, and it’s
better to know beforehand what you are going to do when it breaks. If I
don’t appear you put the stones away safely and wait till I send you
word. Don’t try to connect with me.”

The next evening as I stood looking at the window display Sanc came by,
glanced inside sharply, and snapped his fingers, which was the “office”
to me that he was going in. I went in about three steps behind him. All
I saw was a fine-looking, elderly man in a policeman’s uniform walking
up the center of the store, active, alert. When I passed him my heart
was pounding so with suspense that I was afraid he would hear it.

Sanc walked straight to the back of the big room and sat on a settee. I
strolled about looking at, but not seeing, the wonderful display of
baubles. The place was fairly filled with Christmas shoppers and
sightseers. Beautifully gowned women and distinguished-looking men stood
at the counters inspecting rare stones and costly ornaments. Visitors
idled around and clerks stepped about briskly. Parties of shoppers were
coming in, the place was filling up with people laughing and chatting.

There was a little pucker between Sanc’s eyes as he held his seat, and I
knew something was wrong.  Looking closer I saw, facing him and but a
few feet away, an attaché of the place conversing with a party of women.
Sanc was stuck and couldn’t transform himself into a clerk under the
man’s eyes. At last he moved away. Sanc took off his hat, put it on the
settee, stood up, and stepped smartly toward the front, a clerk now, and
I right behind him with my dummy parcel.

Sanc’s unavoidable delay in transforming himself into a clerk was fatal
to our plan. One glance along the show cases that contained the most
valuable stones showed us that they were all out and under inspection by
patrons who came in after we did. Time was precious, worth more than
money. He dared not hesitate. Turning quickly, he crossed the room and
stepped behind the long line of show cases, passed two busy clerks, and
stopped at a case that held a number of trays of small stones.

“Now, here’s something, sir,” he said to me as he reached in and brought
out a tray holding one dozen rings, the best in sight that he could get
at. My parcel was on the show case and he did not wait for me to act; he
placed it on top of the tray and turned away toward the rear of the
store. Shaking with suspense I managed to pick it up and place it
properly under my arm, holding it closely to my side.

On the sidewalk I wanted to run, expecting to hear a hue and cry from
the store. In turning the first corner I looked back. Sanc wasn’t more
than twenty feet behind me. I slowed up for him and we went straight to
the room.

“Another bunch of rotten luck, kid,” he said, peeling off his black
suit. “This town has me hoodooed.  I’m gone from it to-night, and you
had better come along. Wrap up that suit and throw it away along with
the shirt and tie. I’ll unharness these ‘rocks.’ We’re lucky if Mary
gives us two thousand dollars on them.”

In an hour he had them out of their settings, which I threw away as
before. He went to his room for his few belongings. I threw mine in a
bag and we met at the ferry where we got a boat to Oakland, leaving
nothing behind us but the hotel keys I had made with such pains and
trouble.

The theft was not reported in the papers. There may be a record of it in
the police archives, for all I know. “I can’t explain their silence,”
said Sanc.  “This much is certain, and it’s the worst part of this
business of ours. Some innocent party is going to ride the blame. They
will never figure that as an outside caper.”

The next day we got an eastbound train and in due time found ourselves
in the town of Pocatello, the stronghold of Salt Chunk Mary. Our knock
at her door was answered by a young and pretty Swedish girl, blue-eyed
and fair-haired. In answer to our call for Mary she laughed and her big,
innocent blue eyes danced. “Aye tank you have bad luck. Miss Mary she
bane on big yamboree.”

We went downtown and rented a room. In Pocatello, as in every other
Western town in those days, it was the correct custom and usage for
sporting people to go on a big jamboree once or twice a year. A jamboree
was usually preceded by a run of good or bad luck. If the celebrant got
hold of a bunch of easy money he or she “went on a tear” to celebrate
the good luck. If the luck got too bad, the way to change it was to go
out and get drunk. The length of these celebrations was determined by
the size of the party’s bankroll or the strength of his constitution.

Salt Chunk Mary’s bankroll had no bottom, and her constitution was
flawless. So it followed that her periods of relaxation were somewhat
extended. Being a very positive-minded person, inclining to action
rather than words, her procedure at these times differed greatly from
the ordinary. When she “went on a toot” the town marshal went fishing or
hunting, and her more timid business rivals closed their places and
remained in a state of siege like storekeepers in Chinatown when a tong
war was declared. It was her custom to visit her friends’ places first,
where friendships were renewed and emphasized by much spending and
drinking, and where obligations were acknowledged and discharged
promptly. She poured liquor into the bums, beggars, ragtags, and
bobtails that hung around the saloons till they were legless drunk, and
unable to follow her triumphal march through the town. She never let up
for the want of money, nor because of inability to “carry her licker.”
Her jamboree closed when she had “made” the last place in town and
that was always the joint of some one she held a grudge against.

Sanc and I were fortunate enough to witness the wind-up of one of her
most memorable celebrations.  Leaving her hack at the curb, she walked
into her victim’s saloon and ordered all hands to drink. When the drinks
were disposed of and paid for, she put both hands on the inner edge of
the bar and pulled it over on the floor. Out of the wreckage she
gathered an armful of bottles. One of them was accurately hurled into
the mirror, and the remainder at anybody in sight. The boss, bartender,
and saloon bums disappeared out the back way and Mary stalked out the
front. On the sidewalk she threw away her hat, tore up what money she
had left, and crawled into her waiting hack. Inside she kicked all the
glass out, lay down on the back seat, and, with her feet out through the
broken window, was driven home in state while the town stood mute.

We allowed her a couple of days to recuperate before calling. When we
appeared she welcomed us as usual with an invitation to eat from the
bottomless bean pot. Sanc threw her the small parcel of stones which she
examined carefully with practiced eye, and a high-powered glass.
Commercial white diamonds were sixty dollars a carat, wholesale, then,
and when she offered us eighteen hundred dollars we took them,
satisfied.

We jumped to Denver, where Sanc got the dice-game concession in the
“Chicken Coop,” a small gambling house. We had three thousand dollars
between us.  Two thousand went into the bankroll and we opened up
bravely. “Soapy Smith,” gambler and bunko man, noted for his high plays
and big winnings and losings, won our two thousand in three successive
plays. Sanc wanted to continue with the balance of our money, but I
refused and stubbornly held on to my last five hundred. We had to quit.

Sanc was a hard loser and followed “Soapy” around town for a week trying
to “elevate” him. He never got away from the bright lights, and Sanc
gave up the notion of sticking him up.

We located a big poker game in a soft spot and decided to “line up” the
players. The biggest gamblers in town sat there nightly and there were
thousands of dollars in sight. After many nights of careful checking, we
were ready to go against it.

Robbery has none of the complications of burglary.  It is simple as one,
two, three. You get it or you don’t.

Sanc with a gun in his hand opened the door softly.  I was behind him.
The players, six of them, were in the midst of a “big play.” None looked
up. At the opposite side of the table, facing us, scrutinizing his
cards, sat Bat Masterson, the last of the real bad men, the fastest man
alive with a gun, and with a record of twenty killings while marshal of
Dodge City, Kansas.

Sanc closed the door on the absorbed poker players as softly as he had
opened it, and “officed” me to follow him out. “What’s wrong?” I asked.

“Nothing but this, Kid. Bat Masterson is sitting in the game. He has a
reputation as a killer and he earned it. When he was marshal of Dodge
City bad men rode from the Texas Panhandle and from Deadwood, Dakota, to
shoot it out with him, and he dropped them all. Nobody knows how many;
he probably don’t know himself. He beat them all to the ‘pull’ and even
now, when he is not exactly young, he is the fastest human being with a
gun. All he has left is his reputation, and he would die rather than
lose it to a couple of ‘stick-ups.’ If I had him in a dark street I
wouldn’t hesitate to ‘throw him up’ and he would ‘go up’ too, but he
would never stand for it with others looking on. I could have put the
gun on him, said: ‘Masterson, I know you; I’ll kill you if you bat an
eye,’ and you could have started to gather up their coin. So far, so
good; but if the brim of your hat or the tip of your shoulder had got
between Mr. Masterson and my eye he would have ‘pulled’ on us and I
would have had to let go at him. If I didn’t kill or disable him with
the first shot, he’d have slaughtered the pair of us.

“I’m not afraid of him, but I am not knowingly going to put myself in
the position of killing anybody for his money. When Masterson sits in a
game, he lays a gun on his lap. His life is forfeit to any ambitious
young bad man looking for a reputation.  Anybody but a ‘stick-up’ could
kill him and get away with it, if he were fast enough or dirty enough to
shoot him in the back. He has the right to sit with a gun on his lap,
and besides, it gives him just a slight psychological edge on the other
players.

“In short, Kid, I don’t want any of Mr. Batterson Masterson’s money by
the stick-up route. There are a lot of bad men here getting by on gall,
but he has guts and I flatter myself that I’ve been around enough to
know the difference. That’s my philosophy, Kid; you can take it or leave
it,” he concluded.

That was the tribute Sanc, who killed one man and was hanged, paid Bat
Masterson, who killed twenty and died peacefully in his bed at a ripe
and respected old age.

Then came a night when the Sanctimonious Kid failed to show up at the
room. I was worried and made the rounds of the gambling houses, joints,
and hangouts, but failed to find him or anybody who had seen him. My
fears were put to rest later when Soapy Smith, who won our bankroll,
appeared in the “Missouri House” and told with the good grace of a man
who had lost fortunes how he had been “taken” by a “stick-up” man for
fifteen hundred dollars.

“It was the first time in a year I had been off Larimer Street, and it
serves me right,” he laughed.  “Anyway, I know him and told him so; and
I’m going to kill him on sight.”

“Soapy,” Jefferson Smith, was a colorful character of the West, the
educated, refined, renegade son of a distinguished Southern family who
turned his wits to crooked ways. When his luck at the faro tables
switched and left him broke, he mounted his box on a corner and sold
nickel bars of soap for fifty cents and one dollar. The fifty-cent bars
were guaranteed to contain a five-dollar bill and the dollar ones a ten.
The bills were wrapped with the soap in plain view of the prospective
purchasers, and when he finished his “spiel” the rush was on.

His “cappers,” “boosters,” and “shills” fought with the yokels for a
chance to get something for nothing and always beat them to the pieces
of soap containing the money.

As a sleight-of-hand man Soapy had no equal off the stage. When the
Gentiles wrested the Salt Lake City government from the Mormons, Soapy
was brought out from Denver and sat as an election judge in the busiest
polling booth in the city. Equipped with a poker player’s “sleeve
holdout” he “went out” with enough Mormon ballots to swing a close
election in favor of a “clean city administration.”

Always a pioneer, he joined the gold rush to the Klondike. He was killed
at Skagway, later, by a bully in the pay of the “Vigilance Committee.”

After the robbery Sanc disappeared, and it was long till I saw him
again. I decided to leave Denver.  I owed them fifteen days on the chain
gang, and had no wish to pay by shoveling snow in the streets. I bought
a ticket to Butte, Montana, regretting the money but not caring to “hit
the road” in the dead of winter across half a dozen of the coldest
states in the Union. I did it in after years, but it was from
necessity—not choice.

Butte was never a “Wild West” town in the accepted sense. Cowboys were
seldom seen. Miners and gamblers ruled the town. The miners were
orderly, hard workers, deep drinkers, and fair fighters.  They had none
of the cheap, shouldering swagger of the “gold-rush” miner. Nearly
everybody owned a gun, but the bullying, gun-toting, would-be bad men
and killers never flourished in Butte. When one of them got peeved and
started to lug out his “cannon” some hard-fisted miner beefed him like
an ox with a fast one to the jaw, and kicked his “gat” out into the
street where small boys scrambled for it.

The mines were worked by Irishmen and “Cousin Jacks” (Cornishmen), who
settled their differences with good, solid blows and despised the use of
weapons. Gambling flourished and was licensed in Montana by an act of
legislature. The possession of any crooked gambling device was a felony.
Consequently the cheap cheaters and tinhorn, shoestring gamblers never
got a footing there. Many of the faro dealers never made a bet of their
own money, and many professional players were married men, who looked
after their families faithfully, feeding and educating their children
with money honestly and systematically won over the faro layouts.
Everybody gambled.  Messenger boys stopped to make a bet. The copper on
the beat would walk in and bet “two and a half to win breakfast money.”
If he won his “two and a half” he went out satisfied. If he lost it, he
got “stuck,” forgot all about his beat, sat down, and “played in” his
bankroll.

The town boasted of an all-night barber shop and a clothing store that
never closed, for the convenience of late-at-night winners who couldn’t
hold on to their winnings till morning.

As I watched a game my first night in Butte, a seedy, torn-out looking
chap stepped up to the layout and made a bet. He won it, and, expertly
shifting his checks about, won a dozen more bets before the deal closed.
“Gimme money,” he said to the dealer, pushing his checks in, “I’m going
to get dressed up this time.” He took off his rusty derby hat and tore
the crown out of it. Putting his hands behind him, he grasped the tails
of his frock coat and with a jerk ripped it up the back clear to the
collar. Money in hand he sought the all-night store, and came back in an
hour, spick and span from head to heel.

I experimented and soon laid a solid foundation for the faro-bank habit
which fastened on me later and kept me broke for years.

Another night a player at the table who had lost steadily for an hour
placed his last stack of checks on a card, saying to the dealer, “Turn
the cards, Sam, that’s the last button on Gabe’s coat.” The cards were
turned and the player lost.

As he was leaving, I looked at him closer, and was sure I knew him. I
got up and stuck my hand out to him. He took it curiously. “You are
George,” I said, “the gentleman who made my fight in the Kansas City
jail the night of my first ‘pinch.’”




CHAPTER XIV


George smiled and took a better grip on my hand.  “Yes, I remember you,
young fellow. You’ve grown some. Have you gathered any wisdom?”

“I’ve gathered enough to know that you are entitled to any part of
this,” I said, producing my small bankroll.

“This is payable to-morrow night,” he said, taking twenty dollars.

The money was returned promptly and a bond of friendship and confidence
was formed that remains unbroken. I came to know him as “Rebel George,”
prince of bunko men, the man who developed and perfected the
“gold-brick” swindle. After stealing a fortune and losing it at faro
bank, he quit in answer to the prayers of his faithful wife, who had for
years shared his vicissitudes in and out of prison. At the age of sixty,
prison bent and money broke, he started life on the level and when last
I heard of him he was in a fair way to succeed in his small business.

From Butte I journeyed to Spokane, Washington, and then to Seattle. I
marvel now that I did not stop in one of those spots of golden
opportunity and go to work. With the money I would have saved in a
couple of years I could have bought land or lots that would have made me
independent in ten years. I think land hunger is inherited. I had no
desire then, nor have I now, to own land. The desire to possess land,
whether inherent or acquired, appears to me to be a sure safeguard
against a wasted, dissolute, harmful life.

I had now become so saturated with the underworld atmosphere that no
thought of any kind of honest endeavor entered my mind. Fully realizing
their value, I passed by many splendid opportunities in the booming
Western towns; not that I was lazy or indolent, but that business and
the hoarding of money had no attraction. I will leave it to the
scientists and investigators to explain why Johnnie Jones lands in a
pulpit, and his chum next door, with equal opportunity, lands in a
penitentiary. It’s too deep for me.  I know I never had any money sense
and never will have, and I know that had I been blessed, or cursed, with
land hunger and money sense I would to-day have more honest dollars than
I ever had crooked dimes.

Twenty years of moderate application to his business will make most any
man independent. In twenty years a journeyman mechanic will handle more
money than a first-class burglar, and at the end of that time he will
have a home and a family and a little money in the bank, while the most
persistent, sober, and industrious burglar is lucky to have his liberty.
He is too old to learn a trade, too old and broken from doing time to
tackle hard labor. Nobody will give him work. He has the prison horrors,
and turns to cheap larcenies and spends the balance of his life doing
short sentences in small jails.

In rare instances the broken thief finds friends, sympathetic,
understanding, and ready to help him.  Strong and kindly hands at his
elbows ease him over the hard spots and direct him to some useful place
in the world. Some understand such kindness and respond by breasting the
current and battling upstream with their best strokes; others do not, or
can not understand, and, like dead fish, float down and away forever.

My apprenticeship under the Sanctimonious Kid was all that could be
desired by either of us, yet my education was far from finished. At
Seattle, almost broke, and doubtful about being able to do anything
worth while by myself, I cast about for a “sidekicker.” Seattle was
rebuilding after her big fire. Money was plentiful, and I never saw such
an aggregation of beggars, tramps, thieves, and yeggs as were gathered
there. Gambling, prostitution, and the smuggling of opium flourished
unmolested. The thieves hung out in Clancey’s gambling house, and were
protected and exploited by him. They thought Clancey was a little “Hinky
Dink” in a little Chicago.

Every time a thief showed up with a hundred dollars he was “pinched,”
but Clancey took him out in an hour—for the hundred. When it was too
late they found out that it was he who had them “pinched.” Clancey died
broke.

In Clancey’s I found “St. Louis Frank,” a product of Kerry Patch, a poor
quarter of St. Louis, Missouri.  I knew him from the bums’ “convention”
at Pocatello, where I met him first. He was clean looking and healthy
and I liked him. About my own age, he was an honest, industrious,
intelligent thief.

One night as we were looking around one of the smaller gambling houses,
all the lights went out suddenly, but before we could get our hands on
any of the money, they came on again. This started us to figuring a way
to put them out at a given time when one of us could stand near a table
and grab the bankroll.  We found where the wires entered the building,
and Frank volunteered to cut them if I would stand inside by the faro
game and snatch the bankroll which was lying exposed in an open drawer
beside the dealer.  It looked so good that we enlisted two other
“Johnsons,” one to plant himself by the dice game, and the other by the
roulette wheel. All three of us were to be in readiness to make a grab
when the lights went out and make our way out of the building in the
darkness.

Saturday night, when the biggest play was on, Frank made his way to the
roof and we took up our posts inside.

I took a position by the faro game. The drawer that held the bankroll
was so situated that a right-handed man would be handicapped in reaching
for the money. Being left-handed, the spot fell to me.  The drawer was
open and the big leather pocketbook containing the money was lying in
the bottom of it in plain sight, and not two feet from where I stood.
The second man, in charge of the game, the “lookout,” sat in a high
chair at the dealer’s right. One of his feet was resting on the edge
of the open drawer, and I saw at a glance that if he jammed the drawer
shut with his foot when the lights went out he would trap my hand.

While I was thinking that over, Frank cut the wires and everybody in the
big room did just what we expected; they remained perfectly still for a
second waiting for the light to come on.

My hand was on the big fat “poke.” I heard a jingle of gold coins across
the room, and somebody shouted: “Thieves! Thieves!” The drawer was
jammed shut on my hand.

Reaching down with my right hand I got the poke and tore my left hand
out of its trap, leaving a piece of skin the size of a half dollar
behind. There were three exits and we all got out safely in the
scramble, and “weighed in” at my room.

Frank was there ahead of us. My grab yielded two thousand dollars in
bills. The chap at the dice game put his hand on a stack of twenty
twenty-dollar gold pieces, but it was too heavy and he fumbled it,
getting only half. Our assistant at the roulette wheel got a couple of
stacks of silver only.

The money was split at once, and our friends departed. Frank took most
of our money out and left it with a saloon man we knew. I stayed in my
room a couple of days waiting for my hand to heal.

One great failing of the thief is that when he gets money he immediately
makes tracks for some hangout where he throws a few dollars on the bar
just to “give the house a tumble” and let them guess where he “scored”
and how much he got.

He looks wise, says nothing, spends a few dollars, and goes out. Then
the guessing begins and it’s surprising what good guessers some poor
thieves are.

Frank insisted that we go downtown a few nights later. I took the
bandage off my hand and went along.  We dropped into “Billy, the Mug’s,”
bought a few drinks, and departed. Half a block away we were pounced on
by a couple of “dicks.” One of them jerked my left hand out of my coat
pocket where I had been keeping it to conceal the skinned place.
“That’s enough,” he said, looking at it. They marched us down to the
gambling house and showed us to the game keepers. They got no
satisfaction there, the gamblers either could not or would not identify
us.  We were then taken down to the city “can,” where they searched us
thoroughly, finding nothing but a few dollars in silver. We were
questioned separately and together, but refused to talk—a guilty man’s
only refuge. The officers ordered the man on the desk to put us on the
“small book,” meaning to hold us as suspicious characters. “Maybe
Corbett can get something out of you,” one of them said to us as they
were leaving.

John Corbett was the officer in charge of the city jail. He was feared
and hated from one end of the country to the other because of his
brutality to prisoners. I doubt if a more brutal, bloodthirsty jailer
ever flourished anywhere. He did not limit his beatings to underworld
people. He beat up rich men, poor men, beggarmen, and thieves
impartially. Anybody that didn’t crawl for Corbett got a good “tamping.”
He was repeatedly brought before the commission for his cruelty to
unfortunates falling into his hands, but for years mustered enough
influence to hold his job. Corbett’s treatment of prisoners was the
shame and scandal of Seattle, and he kept it up until the women of that
city got the right to vote. Then their clubs, in a body, went to the
mayor and demanded Corbett’s removal. He was removed.

Corbett appeared and took me downstairs where the cells were, in a
moldy, damp, dark half basement.  He was a powerful man, not tall, but
thick and broad.  He was black-browed, brutal-faced, heavy-jawed. He
opened a cell door and I started to step in but he detained me. I sensed
something wrong. His brownish-red eyes gleamed like a fanatic’s. “You’d
better tell me all about that robbery, young man.” His voice was cold,
level, and passionless.

“I know nothing about it, sir,” I answered very decently; I was afraid.
Like a flash one of his hands went to my throat. He pinned me to the
wall, choking me, and brought something down on my head with the other
hand that turned everything yellow and made my knees weaken. Still
holding me by the throat he lifted me clear of the floor and threw me
into the cell like a bundle of rags. There was about a half inch of
water on the cell floor. I lay there in it, and looked about me by the
dim light of a gas jet out in the corridor. There was nothing in the
cell but a wooden bench.

After a few minutes I crawled over to it, and, pulling myself up,
stretched out, more dead than alive.  If people can be corrected by
cruelty I would have left that cell a saint.

St. Louis Frank, in another part of the jail, got a worse beating than I
did.

Our friends outside were busy. At ten o’clock next morning James
Hamilton Lewis, affectionately called “Jim Ham,” later United States
senator from Illinois, then an ambitious fighting young lawyer who never
“laid down” on a client, came to see us. At two that afternoon he had us
out on a writ, free.

From that day on St. Louis Frank smiled no more.  He became snarly,
short spoken, and ugly. We got our money and parted. He went out on the
road “bull simple,” simple on the subject of shooting policemen. The
stories told about him are almost unbelievable. Years later I saw him in
the San Francisco county jail where he was waiting trial for the murder
of a police officer in Valencia Street. The day he went to San Quentin
where he was hanged, he sang out to me: “So long, Blacky. If I could
have got Corbett I wouldn’t care.”

All Corbett’s beating did for me was to make me a little more careful. I
got a boat to San Francisco, not knowing just what to do, but with a
notion of killing time till old Foot-and-a-half George finished his time
in Utah, and meeting him. I dug up the hotel keys Sanc and I had planted
and experimented a little in hotel prowling. I hadn’t the sure touch
that came in later years with experience, and didn’t do much good.

One night in the Baldwin Hotel Annex I got a roll of bills that rather
surprised me, and I was still more surprised when I read in the next
evening’s paper that George Dixon, the little colored champion fighter,
had lost his money to a burglar. At the Baldwin bar the next night
somebody asked him what he would have done had he been awakened by the
burglar.

Dixon, always a good loser, smiled. “I’d ’a’ done just what you’d ’a’
done. I’d ’a’ gone right back to sleep till that man went on out.”




CHAPTER XV


During my stay in San Francisco I lived at the Reno House, a small
workingman’s lodgings in Sacramento Street. It was owned by a man named
Rolkin, a carpenter, who invested his small savings in it knowing
nothing about the hotel business. He had a “crazy notion” that he could
put clean linen on every bed every day in this cheap place and survive.
His competitors said he was insane. He persisted, however, and on that
“crazy idea” he built a string of fine hotels that he counts to-day like
a barefoot Franciscan counting his beads.

I brought a terrible cold out of the Seattle jail that hung on for
months. I got worried about it and went to a doctor. After looking me
over carefully he pronounced one of my lungs bad and said I was in a
fair way to fall into consumption. He advised me to go to a different
climate, not to worry and get into a panic about it, and to take
cod-liver oil. “Not the emulsion,” he said, “but the raw oil. It’s nasty
stuff to take, but it will save you. Take it for a year if you can
stomach it that long.”

I followed his advice. The cold was gone in a week, and in a month I
gained ten pounds. I stuck to the nauseating raw oil for a year, and
to-day I firmly believe that if I hadn’t I would have long ago succumbed
to the dreaded prison scourge, T.B.

One night as I was meandering over Kearny Street toward the Coast
somebody fell into step beside me.  I looked around and saw Soldier
Johnnie. We were well met, and I asked about his visit home. “Hell, I
only got as far as ‘Chi.’ I bumped into a tribe of hungry bums,
winter-bound and starving there. They were living off the free-lunch
counters and the weather was so fierce they couldn’t stay out on the
street long enough to beg a dime for a ten-cent ‘flop’ in the
Knickerbocker Hotel. They were so miserable and forlorn that I went over
to the West Side and rented a housekeeping joint and gave them an indoor
‘convention.’ In six weeks my thousand dollars was gone and I put in the
rest of the winter hanging around Hinky Dink’s and Bathhouse John’s.
When the weather got right I rambled west to Salt Lake. I was going to
hold it down in ‘The Lake’ till George came out, but I met a beggar that
had put in the winter here in the city and he implored me to come out
here and take one look at the ‘box’ in the Wigwam Theater. I’ve looked
it over and it’s the softest thing I ever saw. It’s older than I am and
I can beat it with a fifty-cent hammer.”

“Do you need any help?”

“No. An outside man would only attract the cops.  I’ll plant inside
before the place closes and get out some way after I get the coin.”

Johnnie didn’t even waste fifty cents for a hammer.  He found one in the
stage carpenter’s kit. He got something over a thousand dollars, all in
gold, and I persuaded him to let me buy tickets to Sacramento, where I
exchanged it for paper money. We got “under” a night passenger train and
held it into Truckee, where we spent a few days fishing and drinking
mickies of alcohol with some congenial bums we found by the river. The
weather was fine, and we journeyed through Nevada on slow freight
trains, sitting in the open side door of a clean box car, with our legs
dangling outside, looking for the scenery.

If the brakeman came along and wanted fifty cents apiece from us, we
refused and got off at the next stop, where we drank cool beers in the
saloon and waited for another train. We waited a week at Ogden for
Foot-and-a-half George who showed up on the day.  His head looked a
little more pointed, his eyes a little deader, and his limp a little
more pronounced. He was in good spirits and condition after “stopping
his jolt” in the stir and anxious to start “rooting.”

Sanc failed to appear, and the three of us jumped into Pocatello to pay
our respects to Salt Chunk Mary.  In a few days her hospitality palled,
and George voted that we move down to the jungle and celebrate his
release from prison.

Bums, thieves, beggars, and yeggs appeared as if they had magic carpets.
In no time the thing assumed the proportions of a convention. Everybody
had money. The crowd soon split up into units. Each unit had its cook
and cooking outfit. The “captain” of each unit collected from the
individuals and sent the younger bums into the town to buy alcohol,
beer, and the “makin’s” of mulligans. There was drinking, fast and
furious, eating, washing, shaving, while some of the older bums mended
their clothes with expert needle. Cripples discarded their crutches and
hopped about the camp fires grotesquely. “Crawlers” with cut-off legs
swung themselves along on their hands drunkenly, like huge toads.

Because of George our unit easily had all the class of the convention.
He sat in state on a coal-oil can by the fire, bottle in hand, royally
receiving the congratulations of bums from the four points of the
compass.

Somewhere near by at another fire a bum sang in a raucous, beery voice,
“Oh, Where Is My Wandering Boy To-night.” “The Face on the Barroom
Floor,” “My Blue Velvet Band,” and “Ostler Joe” were alcoholically
recited by a fat, red-faced bum in a greasy coat, after which the
convention stretched out on the warm ground and slumbered peacefully in
the balmy summer air.

The cook of our party was a stranger to me. A tall, lank man of fifty,
with a straggly black beard and matted black hair hanging to his
shoulder. He never spoke except when the bottle was passed to him. Then
he would hold it aloft and in a dead, empty voice offer his unfailing
toast. “The stool pigeon is the coming race.”

“Kid,” said George, when I asked him about the cook. “He’s crazy as a
bed bug and the best ‘mulligan’ maker on the road. ‘Montana Blacky’ is
welcome at any bum camp anywhere, and he spends his life going from
jungle to jungle.”

Each day the bums drank more and ate less. The cooks were drunk and
would prepare no food. The fiery alcohol had done its work. The bums
that could stand up were fighting or snapping and snarling at each
other. Many lay on their backs helpless, glass-eyed and open-mouthed,
while others crawled about on all fours like big spiders. No more
laughter, songs or recitations. Gloom settled over the camp and
Tragedy waited in the wings for his cue to stalk upon the stage.

Just when the convention was about to close for the want of able
drinkers, a fresh contingent of bums arrived from over the Oregon Short
Line. They were brass peddlers and had a big assortment of “solid gold”
wedding rings. A big young fellow they called “Gold Tooth” seemed to be
“captain” of the outfit.  Along toward dark they finished the last of
our liquor, and Gold Tooth and his tribe prepared to go into the town to
make a “plunge.” He detailed a couple of them to take the main “drag,”
another to make the railroad men’s boarding houses, another to the
saloons.

“I’ll make the cribs myself. I’m dynamite with them old brums in the
cribs,” he declared, with a satisfied, confident air.

The “brass” was portioned out and they started uptown to “tell the
natives how it happened.” There is no more industrious person than a
half-drunk brass peddler out on the street “making a plunge” for enough
coin to buy himself another micky of alcohol.  The first peddler
returned in an hour with his quota of “Dr. Hall” (alcohol), and the
drinking began afresh. George, Johnnie, and I had enough; we drank
sparingly. One by one they straggled in with their bottles till all had
arrived but Gold Tooth.

There was much speculation as to what had happened to him, and his
“tribe” finally decided he had been “yaffled by the town whittler.” In
the language of the bums “yaffled” is arrested, and the “town whittler”
is the constable, so-called because he is usually found sitting in some
comfortable place whittling a stick.

When Gold Tooth did show up, it was evident that he would have been
lucky had the town whittler got him first. Blood was running down his
face from wounds on his head, his shirt was in strands, and he was
raving.

“Look at me,” he screamed, “this is the rankest deal I’ve got in my ten
years on the road. And where do you think I got it? In Salt Chunk
Mary’s. I go in her joint and drop a hoop to one of her frowsy little
brums for nine dollars. I’m decent enough to buy her a bottle of beer
when she pays me for my brass.  When she goes out for the beer she shows
the hoop to Mary. She comes in and deliberately orders me to blow back
the jane’s nine bucks. I tells her there’s nothing doin’ and starts for
the door. Mary hits me in the back of the head with a bottle of beer,
and when I go down she puts the boots to me.”

George sat up and looked at the speaker curiously.

Still standing by the fire, he continued: “That’s what I get for bein’ a
good bum. I’m goin’ back up there to-night and burn down her shack; the
dirty, big, red-headed Amazonian battle-ax. I’ll——”

“Hey, you,” said George from across the fire, “you’re a liar.” His
little dead blue eyes were blazing like a wounded wild boar’s. “You was
a good bum, but you’re dog meat now.” A gun flashed from beneath his
coat, and he fired into Gold Tooth twice.  Six feet away, I could *feel*
the slugs hit him. His head fell forward and both hands went to his
chest, where he was hit. He turned round, like a dog getting ready to
lie down and fell on his face. His hat rolled into the fire. His hands
were clawing the red-hot coals.

Soldier Johnnie ran around and pulled him away from the fire by the
feet. George stood, with the gun smoking, glaring at the others of Gold
Tooth’s tribe.  They slunk away into the dark, gibbering drunkenly.
Some of the drunken sleepers by the fire were not even aroused by the
shots. Johnnie kicked them awake; they got up and staggered away.
Montana Blacky, our crazy cook, reeled unsteadily into the circle of
firelight, wabbling like an old crow on a dead limb.  Holding his bottle
aloft, he croaked: “Oh, then the bums began to fight, and there was
murder right and tight.” Waving his arm over the scene as if conferring
his benediction on the fire, the dead man, George, Johnnie, and myself,
he disappeared, muttering: “The stool pigeon’s the coming race.”

George handed me his pistol. “Throw this in the river, Kid.” I broke it
open, took out the slugs and empty shells, threw them into the water at
one place, and the gun at another. We hurried away toward the railroad
yards. On the way up, we decided that Johnnie should stay in Pocatello
and intimidate any of the weaker bums who might talk, and also try to
shoo them all out of town.

In the railroad yards, I had my eyes opened to one of the safest
getaways ever discovered—that of “springing” into a loaded box car.
Johnnie got an iron bar out of a scrap pile. Equipped with this, we went
through the long lines of loaded cars waiting to be routed out of
Pocatello, and in a few minutes found a car of merchandise billed to
Great Falls, Montana. The process of “springing in” was simple.  With
the iron bar Johnnie lifted the bottom of a side door till it was clear
of the hasps that held it in place.  Placing one foot against the car,
he pulled the bottom of the door out, away from its position, making
space enough for us to crawl up into the opening. When we were safely
inside, he sprang the door back into its place with his bar. Usually one
or both end doors were fastened on the inside, making it easy to get
out.

In those days this was the bums’ best getaway, and it never failed
unless they went to sleep and snored so loud that the brakeman heard
them when the train was on a sidetrack. Supplied with food and water,
men have traveled across the continent in safety while sheriffs and
posses beat up the jungles for them in vain.

Luckily enough, we got into a train that was already “made up” for
departure, and it pulled out in an hour.  Making ourselves comfortable
on top of the cases of merchandise, we took turn about sleeping, and
after a ride of almost twenty-four hours, got into Silver Bow Junction,
where we opened an end door and crawled out, hungry and thirsty. Then a
walk of six miles, and we were in Butte City, where we got food and a
room.

George was well known to the police in Butte, but took no pains to hide
himself, feeling sure that the masonry of the road and jungle would
protect him against the common enemy—the law.

The next afternoon we were picked up on the street by plain-clothes men
and taken before the chief of police.

“What’s wrong now, chief?” queried George.

“Oh, nothing much, Foot-’n’-a-half, just a telegram from
Pocatello—murder charge,” smiled the chief.

“What about me?” I asked.

He looked at a telegram on his desk. “Hold anybody found with him.”

They searched us thoroughly and held everything found on us. We were
locked up alone, in separate cells. “You’ve got plenty of money, boys,”
said the jailer, “you can buy anything you want in the way of food and
tobacco.”

I sat on the side of my iron cot, wondering who had kicked over the bean
pot. A rat-eyed trusty came down the corridor and stopped in front of
George’s cell, directly across from mine. “What’s the trouble,
old-timer?”

George looked at him coldly. “Oh, nothing much.  I just bit a baby’s arm
off.”

The trusty went away. Something told him to ask no more questions.

Idaho officers came the next day and we went back with them to
Pocatello, not caring to waste our money fighting extradition, and
feeling confident there was nothing more than a suspicion of guilt
against us.  We were taken straight from the train at Pocatello to an
undertaker’s. Every town official was there.  Inside, in the back room,
they led George up to a table where his victim was laid out under a
white cloth. He knew what was coming, and so did I. The cloth was jerked
off the body and one of the officers pointed his finger at George.

“There’s the poor devil you shot, you damned, murdering ———, and we’ll
hang you for it.”

George coolly and calmly placed his right hand on the dead man’s brow
for an instant. Then, taking it away, he held his arm out full length
with the palm of his hand up, and said to the officer:

“If I killed that man, there’s the hand that held the gun, and there’s
the finger that pulled the trigger” (jerking his index finger back and
forth), and, pulling up his coat sleeve, “there’s my pulse! Do you want
to feel it?”

They weakened. The old yegg had beaten them at their own game.

“Lock them up!” ordered somebody in authority. The marshal and
a crowd of citizens took us to the calaboose, a small, one-room
shack in the middle of a big lot. They waited around till a pair of
villainous-looking Bannock Indians appeared with rifles. They were
hired to watch us and took turn about, sitting on a box outside by the
door, day and night, silent, motionless. At evening the marshal brought
a basket of food from a near-by restaurant, and a bundle of clean, new
blankets.

Pocatello boasted of two lawyers, brothers. One prosecuted cases in the
magistrate’s court, and the other defended anybody foolish enough to
hire him.  Salt Chunk Mary sent the defender over to see us the next
day. He hadn’t influence enough to have us brought to his office, so he
talked to us through the calaboose-door wicket. We were not going to
waste any money on him. We decided to wait and see if we needed a lawyer
first. George thanked him for coming, told him we had done nothing, and
didn’t need an attorney.

Every day for a week we were taken out and questioned. At the end of
that time, having exhausted their stock of questions and patience, the
marshal and his deputy had us into the justice’s court charged with
vagrancy. In ten minutes we were tried, convicted, and sentenced to six
months each in the county jail at Blackfoot.

No matter how small the town is, somebody can be found to fix things.
Mary was on the job and got the town fixer to “see the judge.” He
consented to suspend the sentences if we would get out of the town and
stay out, warning us that if we ever came back we would automatically
start serving our time.

We went over to Mary’s to get out of sight till train-time, and find out
what had caused our arrest.  Soldier Johnnie had not appeared at her
place. He folded his tent and stole away with other members of the
convention, and so precarious was the life we led that it was fifteen
years till I saw him again. All Mary had gathered was that the marshal,
noting the scarcity of bums about town, had gone down to the jungle,
where he found a dead man sprawled beside a burnt-out fire. Searching
the jungle further, he came upon poor old Montana Blacky, raving mad. He
was taken in and later sent to an asylum. He was the only bum in
Pocatello the day after the convention’s tragic close. We never knew
what caused our arrest, but surmised that Blacky in his ravings might
have named George as the killer.

When our train pulled out, the marshal was there to see that we got
aboard and to ascertain where we were going. We foiled him by neglecting
to buy tickets, and at the same time saved ourselves money by paying a
hungry conductor half fare cash to ride us into Butte.

There I began my apprenticeship at the dangerous and fascinating
business of breaking open safes. As was proper, I did all the fetching
and carrying. I stole the dan, bought the drills, got railroad
time-tables, and guidebooks. I was sent out to make the preliminary
survey of the “spot” George had designs on. I reported to him whether
the spot was “flopped” in. I looked up the getaway, the all-important
thing.  No place is fat enough to tempt unless some feasible getaway can
be figured out.

I located the blacksmith shop, where heavy tools could be had if needed,
and the livery stable, where saddle horses could be got if required. I
learned what trains passed, and when. I checked the town whittler’s
comings and goings. I was careful to look over the place for dogs, the
bane of the burglar’s life. If my report satisfied George, he looked it
over once to make sure. When we went against a spot he did the
“blacksmithing” inside, while I covered the outside.

We traveled on foot, on horseback, or on trains as the occasion
required. A hike of twenty, thirty, or even forty miles was not rare. We
never got any such great amounts of money as burglars get to-day.  A
thousand dollars was considered a good “touch.” I believe a thief could
get more out of a thousand dollars thirty years ago than he could out of
five thousand to-day. Living was cheaper, police fewer and less active,
shyster lawyers not so greedy and well organized, and the fences and
fixers not so rapacious.  “Justice” was not so expensive.

Only the large cities attempted anything in the way of identification.
The Bertillon system was in the experimental stage and finger printing
unknown in police work. We jumped from one state to another, kept away
from the cities, lived almost entirely on the road except in the dead of
winter, and spent our money in the jungles with the bums or played it in
against faro bank in the mining towns. When we got a decent piece of
money we quit stealing till it was almost spent, but while we were
spending it we always tried to locate new spots against the day when we
would be broke. George, although past fifty, never spoke of quitting. I
doubt if the thought ever entered his mind. He was as much attached to
his trade as any carpenter or bricklayer, and went about it as
methodically as any mechanic.

His cold-blooded shooting of Gold Tooth caused many bums to avoid him.
After he was dead, I learned by accident why he did it, but it was too
late then to shake hands with him over it.

A year after we were banished from Pocatello, a letter from Mary told us
that the Sanctimonious Kid was arrested in Denver, charged with a tough
burglary, and wanted help. She wanted to help him, but didn’t know how
to go about it. I sneaked into Pocatello for her generous contribution,
and with what we could spare we went to Denver and got him the best
lawyer there—Tom Patterson, afterward Senator Patterson from Colorado.
We stayed in the state, turning every dollar we could steal into his
lawyer’s office, but in vain. Sanc got everything Patterson had in the
way of service, and finished with fifteen years at Canon City.

A small post office in Utah yielded us a few dollars and a big bundle of
“stickers.” I had no fear of Pocatello after getting in and out of it
once, and we thought it only right that Mary should have the stamps and
get the profit on them. I got into her place with them, but she hadn’t
enough money and I had to wait till morning for her to get it from the
bank. Instead of staying quietly in her house, as she advised, I went
out for a look at the town and the whittler got me.

He threw me in the calaboose, promising to take me to Blackfoot the next
day to start on my six months. He hired no Indians this time, but just
locked the door and went back uptown, probably to look for George. I
paced up and down the length of the calaboose, cursing my carelessness.
About midnight there came a rap on the door.

“Are you in there, Kid?” It was Salt Chunk Mary.  She passed in a small
bottle of whisky and some sandwiches. I implored her to go over by the
depot and try to find some bum that would break the lock and let me out.

“No use, Kid,” she said. “The town has been hostile ever since the
convention. A bum can’t light here any more. I’ll try to get some
gambler to do it.”

She hurried away. In an hour she came back alone, armed with a crowbar.
She put the pointed end of it into the neck of the lock and with a
mighty wrench twisted it off and threw the door open. I stepped out.
That pale, light-fingered ghost, “The lady that’s known as Lou,” would
have fainted in my arms. Not Mary. When I reached for her hand, she
pushed me away.

“Don’t waste time thanking me. Here’s the coin for your stickers. I
borrowed it from the girls.  You’ve got to hurry; there’s a train
leaving in ten minutes.”

While I was still pouring out my thanks to Mary she turned away, and I
hastened to the railroad yards, where I hid myself till the train pulled
in. I didn’t go near the depot to buy a ticket, but crawled under a
coach and deposited myself on the rods.  Before daylight I crawled out
at Ogden and hiked straight out of the town. I waited at the first
station out, and in a few hours got a train into Salt Lake, where George
was waiting for me.

He had seen Judge Powers, who defended me when I ran away from the
verdict of not guilty. The judge assured him that there was no claim on
me and the worst I need fear was a charge of “vag” from some sore-head
copper. I at once told him of my troubles at Pocatello and my delivery
from the calaboose by Mary.

“You don’t have to tell me what a grand character she is, Kid. I know
all about that. She’s righter than April rain. If you knew half what I
know about her you’d have put a couple of slugs into Gold Tooth
yourself. You probably thought I ‘smoked him off’ because I was full of
‘Hall’ (alcohol) and wanted to cut some crazy caper. I croaked him
because he was slandering the best woman that ever stood in two shoes.
I’m not lookin’ for a chance to kill anybody.  I got my belly full of
that in the war, an’ that ain’t all. No matter what they say, dead men
do tell tales.  Robbery and burglary are soon forgotten and outlawed,
but when you leave a dead man behind you they’ve got the balance of
your life to catch you and hang you. A couple of those bums could go
into the Salvation Army ten years from now and get religion and hang
me.

“I’ve packed a gun for thirty years, and every time I fired it I was in
the wrong except, maybe, when I let that Gold Tooth have it. That’s
because my business is wrong. But it don’t include murder and I won’t
travel with anybody that deliberately shoots people.

“When the town ‘bull’ interferes with you at night shoot at him, of
course, and shoot at him first; but don’t hit him. He thinks you’re
tryin’ to kill him and that’s enough. He’ll go after reënforcements and
you get away. If he shoots at you that’s just a common incident; if he
hits you it’s a rare accident.

“You’re only beginning at this racket, Kid,” finished the veteran yegg.
“Take my advice and be careful with your gun. It’s a good servant, but
don’t let it become your master or it will hang you.”

We hadn’t been in Salt Lake ten days till one of the “dicks” that put me
on trial in Smiler’s case came into the “Gold Room,” a gambling house we
hung out in, and took me off to jail. They held me all day and that
night, trying to dig up some charge to put against me. Judge Powers came
the following day, and after a lot of palaver they charged me with
vagrancy. He got me a bond and I was later dismissed.

Harry Hinds, who kept the Gold Room, saw the police and came back with
the good news that we could stay in Salt Lake as long as we didn’t
“bother” anybody in the city and that they didn’t care what we did
outside the city limits.

We made our headquarters in the city for more than a year. We hung out
in the Gold Room and our persistent attempts to beat the faro game kept
us continually jumping into the near-by towns to replenish our bankroll.
Dynamite was easy to get and we didn’t trouble ourselves to go to Ogden
for the parcel I had left in the safety vault. We became quite
established in Salt Lake and came to know many people.  We lived at a
quiet, second-class hotel, and went about our business in a decent,
orderly manner.

George lost all interest in bums and their gatherings after the
convention at Pocatello, and kept away from them. They still attracted
me, and occasionally I went down to the jungle on the banks of the river
Jordan that empties into the Great Salt Lake.

On one of those visits I fell in with a crippled beggar who had been
down on the “poultice route” in southern Utah. He had formerly been a
very capable thief, but the loss of a leg under a train at once disabled
and reformed him, and he turned to begging, as many do when they can no
longer steal. I had a bottle of “Dr.  Hall” and as we passed it back and
forth the beggar bewailed his misfortune in losing his leg and having to
“dingdong” his way about the country for a few “lousy dimes.” “There’s a
box,” he wailed, “in the county treasurer’s office in the courthouse at
the town of ——— that I could chop the back out of with an ax, if I was
able-bodied. The town whittler goes to bed when the general store closes
at nine o’clock at night.  There ain’t five hundred people in the town
and they’re all in bed before ten o’clock. I went in to beg the county
treasurer and he gave me four bits. The ‘box’ was open and I saw a stack
of ‘soft stuff’ (paper money) that would make Rockefeller’s mouth
water.”

He drank himself speechless and went to sleep mumbling his misfortune.

I told George about it and we looked it up on the map and found it was
twenty miles off a railroad. “I don’t like the way it’s situated, Kid,”
said George, “but there’s three or four thousand dollars there now while
they’re collecting taxes, and we’d better look at it.”

We got a small roll of blankets each, and bought tickets to a town forty
miles distant from the county seat. George went first, and I followed
the next day.  At this base he hired a saddle horse, and departed to
look the spot over. He got back in a few days and reported that it was
even “softer” than the cripple had pictured it.

“We’ll hike the forty miles into the town, Kid, by easy stages, beat off
the box, and get a couple of horses out of the livery stable. By
daylight we ought to be thirty miles away, where we will ditch the
horses and plant in the jungles till night. After that we will have to
hike nights till we get back to ‘The Lake.’”

The following Sunday night we got into the town, but found there was a
social gathering in the church, next door to the courthouse. That
delayed us till twelve o’clock. At one o’clock we went into the stables
across the street, and saddled two gentle horses, leaving them in their
stalls. The town was dark, dead, and we went into the courthouse and to
a rear room where the safe stood.

The master coolly removed his coat, throwing it on top of the safe. On
the coat he laid a big “cannon.” I opened the small parcel containing
the “dan” and “stems” (drills). From the blacksmith shop we had taken a
carpenter’s hand brace and a pinch bar.  With this primitive outfit
George attacked the box in a most workmanlike manner. I went outside,
but there was nobody in sight, and the only sound was the pawing of a
horse in the stable across the street. At two o’clock George came out to
look around himself.  He was ready to “shoot her.” The make of the box
required that the door be blown entirely out of place and the explosion
seemed tremendous in the dead, quiet night with nerves on edge. But the
town slumbered on.

George waited outside, but there was no alarm, and he went back,
returning in five minutes with a small but heavy bag of gold pieces that
clinked sweetly when he dropped it into his coat pocket.

“You carry this head of cabbage, Kid,” passing me a pack of greenbacks
about the size of a brick.

Dawn was graying the east as we went into the stable and bridled the
horses. George went out first, pulling his reluctant horse by the bridle
rein pulled over his head. In the door his horse stopped, and George,
standing outside on the inclined platform, tugged with both hands while
I slapped the horse on his rump. Suddenly George dropped the bridle rein
and his hand went to the waistband of his trousers for a gun.

A voice shouted, “Here, you damned horse thief,” and a shotgun belched
murderously, then again.  George got both barrels. He was almost blown
off his feet. He toppled over sidewise and his body rolled slowly down
the incline to the ground.

The man with the shotgun knew his bloody business.  I plainly heard the
sinister click of the breech-lock as he snapped it shut after reloading.
Neither of the horses was gun-shy; they stood still. The gunshot echoes
died away. A whiff of powder smoke drifted above and across George’s
body. The silence was awful. I could feel the shooter outside standing
at “ready” with his murderous gun. I was trapped; my pistol was useless
against such odds. Somewhere in the stable a horse, heaving heavily to
his feet, shook the floor and roused me from my trance of fear and
shock. I remembered having seen a door in the side of the barn opposite
where the man with the gun was. I ran to it and out into a lot. Across
the street was the courthouse and the general store. There was a cellar
beneath the store. I had looked into it while George was working on the
“box.” Its old-fashioned inclined doors were open and it was piled full
of farm implements, empty boxes, crates, kegs of nails, etc.

Half panicky, I dashed across the street and into the cellar, where I
hid amongst the junk at the end farthest from the door. In a half hour
the town was on fire with excitement. The store was opened and I heard
loud voices and the tramp of many feet above me. There was a clattering
of horses’ hoofs in the street, and I knew the hue and cry was on. I
burrowed deeper into boxes and bales, prepared for a long wait.

When daylight came I saw a pair of stairs leading up to a trapdoor in
the store floor. There was much coming and going all day, and the steady
hum of voices. I strained my ears, but couldn’t make head or tail of the
talk. I put in a long, hard day, and when night came and the store was
closed I was famished for food and water. All day I had been debating in
my mind whether I should sneak out at dark and try to hike away, or hold
down the cellar for another twenty-four hours. I had just decided to go
out and chance it when I heard the cellar doors banged down from the
outside, then the click of a padlock. I was locked in.

About midnight I went up the steps and found the trapdoor unfastened.
The store was dark, but I soon found the cheese and crackers and
carefully “weeded” out a good portion of each. There was a bucket of
water in the back of the store, and I filled an empty bottle from it,
after drinking all I could.

Letting myself out of a window at the back, I closed it carefully after
me, and hiked out of the town.  Before daylight I carefully planted my
“head of cabbage” in a field and crawled into a clump of bushes a
hundred yards away to sleep and rest up for the next night.

Between hunting in fields, gardens, and orchards at night for food, and
walking as fast as I could, it took me four nights to get to the main
line of the railroad sixty miles away. Counting the money, I found there
was three thousand dollars of “green and greasy,” worn paper money, in
small bills.

During my long hike I had plenty of time to decide what to do. I made up
my mind not to go near Salt Lake, where I was known. This money had been
the death of poor old George, and I felt that he would turn over in his
grave if I lost it and my liberty, too.  I took out a hundred dollars
and buried the rest with the utmost care.

At Provo, Utah, I got some fresh clothes and settled down to wait till
the business cooled off. From the papers I gathered that George was
killed by the livery-stable owner, who had got up early to go duck
shooting. Going to his stable to get a horse, he found the back door
open and waited to see what was going on. He thought he had a horse
thief, and only fired when George reached for his gun. Two thousand
dollars in gold was found in George’s coat pocket, and returned to the
county. The hunt was still on for the burglar with the big end of the
money. Nobody claimed the dead man’s body and he was buried unnamed and
unknown.

After a miserable month’s wait, I dug up my money and bought a ticket to
Chicago by the way of Denver and Omaha, going a roundabout way for fear
of meeting my father and having to face his clear, cold eyes.  If it had
been honest money I would have gone to him and offered him any part of
it, but I was afraid to face him with a lie.

I got into Chicago safely and immediately put my fortune in a safety
box. Then I bought plenty of good clothes and got myself a nice room
near the corner of Clark and Madison Streets. That seemed to be the
center of the night life, and I instinctively anchored there. I put in
the winter investigating the cheap dives, hurdy-gurdies, and dance
halls. The tough Tenderloin district attracted me also. The beer bums
and barrel-house five-cent whisky bums came under my notice. Not very
different from the winos of San Francisco. I visited the five-cent
barber shops of lower Clark Street and the ten-cent “flops” and dime
ham-and-bean joints. Nothing escaped me. I nibbled at the faro games,
but was careful and never got hurt.  Every night I looked into Hinky
Dink’s and Bathhouse John’s bars and heard the same old alarm, “here
comes the wagon.” But those two kings of the First Ward were “Johnnie on
the spot” and never allowed any of “their people” to languish in the
“can” overnight.

I discovered the saloon of “Mush Mouth” Johnson, a negro politician of
power, and, fascinated, watched his patrons, each in turn trying to make
the bone dice roll his way.

I stumbled upon the hop joint of “California Jack,” an old Chinaman from
Sacramento, who was waxing fat in his make-believe laundry in South
State Street.  Thieves, pickpockets, and pimps and their girls smoked
unmolested day or night. Now and then a tired waiter or bartender threw
himself wearily on a bunk.

I fell in with a wolfish-eyed girl of the streets, hungry and shivering
in a doorway, so shabby that men would not throw an appraising glance at
her. Like Julia she was almost “ready for the river.” I bought her food
and clothes and a room. I gave her no advice and sought no profit from
the transaction.  With better clothes and food she plied her trade
confidently and prospered. I saw her often on the streets.  One night
she paid me the money I had spent for her.

Then came a midnight when she knocked at my door, pale, panting with
fear. “You must help me,” she implored. “I have no friend but you. A man
is dead in my room. If he is found there the police—you know—they’ll say
it’s murder.”

On the street we got a hack and in ten minutes were at her place. A
shabby parlor fronted on the street; in back of it was a bedroom. On the
bed, fully dressed, lying crosswise with feet on the floor, was the body
of a man. Well dressed, about fifty, he might have been a clerk. I went
out the back door and to the alley. There was no one in sight. When I
came back she was shivering in a chair. I put the dead man’s hat in my
pocket and asked her to help me lift him to my shoulder. She refused to
touch “the thing.” With an effort I got it to my shoulder, the head and
arms hanging down my back. Clasping my arms around its legs, I staggered
out the back way toward the alley.

Stumbling up the dark alley over tins, wires, broken boxes, and other
rubbish, I carried my dangerous burden almost to the cross street and
threw it down, leaving the hat beside it. Annie Ireland, or “Irish
Annie” as she was called by the street girls, was still huddled in the
chair in a corner of the room farthest from the bed when I returned.

“Where did you leave it?” she whispered.

“Up the alley,” I told her shortly. I had no stomach for this business,
and wanted to be away and done with her. I felt sure she had dealt the
man a jolt of chloral or some other stupefying drug.

“Look here, Annie,” I warned her, “if you’ve got any of that guy’s junk
around here you’d better ditch it. They will find him in the morning,
and every crib in the block might be searched.”

“No, no,” she protested. “I didn’t touch him. I picked him up on the
street. When we came in here he stretched out across the bed and went to
sleep. I took my hat and coat off and tried to wake him, but couldn’t.
After a while his hands turned cold and I saw he was dead. Then I went
for you.”

I went out, and she followed me. “Where are you going now?” I asked.

“Oh, I don’t know—outside, anywhere. I can’t stay in there. I’ll go down
the line and get drunk, I guess.”

I left her at the corner, resolved to see no more of her. But that
wasn’t to be, for there came a day, years after, when she held up her
hand in a court and perjured me into prison. The next day I moved to
another part of the city and kept away from the blocks she walked at
night. I met her no more, and she soon fell into the background of my
memory. I watched the papers, but saw nothing except a few lines
reporting the finding of the body of an unidentified man in an alley. A
dead man in an alley didn’t mean much in Chicago then and his body
probably went to the potter’s field or a medical college.




CHAPTER XVI


Summer came and the memorable World’s Fair.  I saw it all, but it put an
awful dent in my bankroll and winter was coming. I heard wonderful tales
of New York City and its opportunities, told by the hop smokers in
California Jack’s, and had almost made up my mind to go there for the
winter when I met an intelligent young chap who knew all about it. He
advised me to stay away from New York.

“It’s the toughest town in the United States for an outsider to get by
in,” he said in answer to my questions. “I’ll tell you what you’re up
against. You go in there single-handed. If you get by the wise coppers
and the hungry fences, you’ve still got the gangs to beat. Almost all
the thieves belong to gangs—the Irish, the Jews, and the dagoes. They
fight each other, but they make common cause against an outsider,
especially if he’s from the West, and they’ll know you in a minute with
your soft hat and your Western talk.

“The gangs are made up of natives and ‘home guards,’ and some of them
are not above snitching on you if you go in there and get too
prosperous. If you show up in any of the hangouts with money they will
beat you up and take it away from you like any sucker. Of course if you
got into a gang they would protect you. The gang protects you, and the
ward alderman protects the gang, see? But even then you’d never have
anything, for the money’s split too many ways.

“Those hop fiends are raving when they tell you New York is a simple
spot to make a living in.  Everything is simple and easy and rosy to
them when they get a few pills under their belts; but you take my advice
and stay away from it. I can get dollars in the West where I couldn’t
get dimes in New York, and I wouldn’t go back there on a bet. I’m for
Chicago and points west where you don’t have to wear a derby hat to get
by a policeman,” he finished in disgust.

Turning this gloomy picture over in my mind for a few days, I decided to
let New York alone and go back West. My spare clothes were left with the
landlord, and after a soft, easy year I went back to the hardships of
the road almost gladly. I made long jumps under fast trains into St.
Paul and then on to the Dakota harvest fields.

Thousands of harvest hands were leaving with their season’s earnings and
a horde of yeggs, thieves, gamblers and their women beset them on every
side.  Some of the more wary and experienced laborers bought tickets and
got out of the danger zone unscathed; others dallied with the games of
chance and were shorn, or fell into the yeggs’ clutches and got “catted
up.”

Harvest workers were called blanket stiffs or gay cats, and the process
of pistoling them away from their money was known as catting them up.
Train crews flourished by carrying the gay cats over their divisions in
the box cars at a dollar each. Bands of yeggs worked with the brakemen,
who let them into the cars, where they stuck up the cats, took their
money, and forced them to jump out the side doors between stations. By
the time they walked into a town and reported their losses, the train
was far ahead, the money split with the train crew, and the yeggs were
holding a convention in some safe jungle.

After several seasons the cats began buying tickets out of the harvest
fields and the profitable industry of catting up went by the board.

I traveled along slowly now, uncertain where to go or what to do.
Meeting many who had seen me and Foot-and-a-half George on the road, I
told them freely the story of his finish and my getaway. My prestige
grew and I came to be accepted everywhere as “Stetson,” which, in the
language of the road, means first class.

Being young I naturally got puffed up and superior.  I looked wise and
mysterious, said nothing, and “connected” only with the higher-ups among
the knights of the road. Stepping out on the street one morning at Great
Falls, Montana, an icy wind out of the north reminded me that winter had
come. I was almost broke, and fearing a Montana winter without money, I
made a dash for the coast. I traveled north through Lethbridge, at the
Canadian line, and into Calgary, Alberta; then west over the Canadian
Pacific toward Vancouver, where I hoped to spend the winter. The snow
had piled up in the Selkirk range, delaying trains for days and making
life on the road uncertain and very unpleasant. My money had dwindled
till buying a ticket was out of the question. Riding the rods of
passenger trains meant freezing, and I was forced to take the slow and
infrequent freights with their open box cars. At one of the larger towns
in British Columbia I stopped off to rest up, get a decent night’s
sleep, and thaw myself out.

In the office of the hotel I went to stood a safe that attracted me. It
was of a make that George always favored, and we had beaten a half dozen
of them in the two years we were together.

No explosives were needed. It could be got “on the quiet.” I put down my
last dollar for a week’s board and room, and began planning an assault
on the ancient “box.”

I was alone, almost broke, and here was opportunity. Opportunity not
only to fortify myself with money, but to test myself and prove whether
my years with George and the Sanctimonious Kid had fitted me to make my
way alone at the profession I had drifted into. I went over the
situation carefully. A westbound passenger train passed through the town
at one o’clock A.M. The hotel closed at midnight. An hour was time
enough for the mechanical work on the box. The time-tables showed that I
could be on the “American side” in twelve hours if I got out on the
night train. Here was a feasible getaway.

The next thing was to make sure that no one entered the hotel office
between the hours of twelve and one.  Several nights’ watching satisfied
me that I would not be interrupted in that way. The week was almost
gone, so was my money, and I saw that more would be needed for my board
and lodging before the arrival of my first big night alone. This forced
me into a small room burglary that was almost fatal.

Prowling through the one other hotel in the town I found a room door
unlocked and stepped inside.  There were two beds in the room, both
occupied. On a chair by the bed nearest the door was the sleeper’s
trousers, from which I got a purse. Pocketing it, I moved to a chair by
the second bed, where I could distinguish something dark that appeared
to be a bunch of clothes.

Right there I learned that a fair-sized, healthy dog sleeps sound as a
human being. Instead of putting my hand on a pair of pants, it touched
something furry that came to life with a start and a growl, and fastened
a pair of strong jaws on my forearm. Both sleepers stirred. Before I got
to the door, dragging the snarling, clawing brute that wouldn’t let go
his grip, the man whose purse I had sat up in bed. I was without a gun,
but threatened to blow his head off just the same. Being a sensible man,
he remained quiet.

I had put out the only light in the hall. Still burdened with the
tenacious, growling dog, I was forced to feel my way with my feet toward
the back stairway. I couldn’t stop in the hall to choke him loose; my
only hope was to drag him downstairs and deal with him outside the
place.

At the top of the stairs his struggles and weight overbalanced me, and
we rolled and bumped down the long, dark stairway to the landing below.
On our way down he weakened, let go his grip on my arm, scrambled to his
feet, and tore out into the alley, howling piteously. I gathered myself
up and ran in the opposite direction. In my room, I took stock and found
he hadn’t injured me, and that I had enough money to carry me for
another week.

I now moved into a small lodging house and paid for my room each night.
As a transient roomer I could leave at any time without causing comment.

Curious to learn something about the dog I was tangled up with, I went
into the office and barroom of the hotel, looking for him. One evening
while I was getting a drink I heard a low, threatening growl across the
room, and a look in the big mirror back of the bar showed me a good,
big, husky shepherd dog standing under a card table. The hair on his
neck and back bristled as he eyed me suspiciously. I thought he was
going to attack me, and turned around to face him. When I did this, he
backed still farther beneath the table, but never took his eyes off
me. The room was crowded with loungers and card players, but none of
them appeared to notice his actions. I went out of the place and
stayed out.

At last the night came that I had decided was to be my last in the town.
I had done everything possible in the way of precaution and protection.
The stormy night favored me and the box gave up its contents after a few
sturdy blows from a short-handled sledgehammer. The train arrived on
time, and when it pulled out I got aboard without a ticket. That was
part of my plan. I didn’t want to be seen at the ticket office, where I
knew inquiries would be made the next day.

The safe contained nothing of value to me but a roll of paper money. I
had no chance to count or examine it while waiting for the train, but
before the conductor got to me I fished out a worn twenty-dollar bill
from which I paid my fare, about fifteen dollars, to Vancouver. I had no
intention of going into that city now, but paid my fare there to mislead
any one making inquiries from the trainmen. I planned to leave the train
at a junction and take another across the border. Well satisfied with
myself, I was reviewing the night’s work when the train slowed down
between stations, about twenty miles from where I got aboard.

After a long wait, the conductor appeared with the information that the
train was blocked by an avalanche of snow and rock. “Make yourselves
comfortable,” he said, “we won’t get out of here before noon to-morrow.”

My carefully laid plans crumbled. I wished myself back in the town. I
thought of the bill I had given the conductor. I could see the
constables with their heads together in the morning “deducing” and
“inferring” with the result that they would deduce and infer that their
burglar had left on the night train. I could see them arriving at our
stalled train some time in the forenoon and buttonholing the conductor.
I could see him pointing his finger at me.

It was suicide to leave the train. Not a hut or habitation within miles
and a terrific storm raging. I went over every possibility and finished
with a helpless, half-trapped feeling. I went into another coach, and,
finding an empty seat, cut a slit in the cushion and planted the roll of
money, keeping only the change from the twenty-dollar bill. There was
nothing else I could do to protect myself. I tried to sleep in a seat,
but couldn’t, so I sat around, apprehensive and nervous, till morning.
The storm abated at daylight and an hour later a work train pulled in
behind us, prepared to dig us out. I got ready for a shock.

Sure enough, in a few minutes, two constables from the town I had left
came slowly down the aisle behind the conductor. When he came to my
seat, he stopped and nodded his head toward me. One officer stood by me,
but said nothing. The other said something aside to the conductor, who
took a roll of bills from his pocket, peeled off the top one and handed
it to him.  He turned the bill over, looked at it carefully, and then at
a piece of paper he had in his hand. After more talk with the conductor
that I couldn’t hear, he turned and faced me with a gun in his hand.

“Put the irons on him, Mr. Stevens,” he said to the officer beside me.
“He is our man.”

I protested against being handcuffed, pushed “Mr. Stevens” away, and
demanded an explanation.

“You’re arrested in the queen’s name,” said the officer in charge, “and
anything you say will be used against you. You had better submit
quietly. If you want force you can have it.” He waved his big,
serviceable-looking gun in my direction.

I submitted. They took me forward to a baggage car, removed my shoes and
nearly all my clothes, and went through them slowly and thoroughly, but
found nothing incriminating. When the train was dug clear it pulled out,
carrying my roll of bills with it in the seat cushion, and I
congratulated myself on getting rid of it. I was taken back to the town
I left so suspiciously the night before, and thrown into the jail
wondering what they had on me. They hadn’t asked me any questions; that
looked bad. They seemed too well satisfied with the thing.

All my speculations were put to rest the next morning when I was brought
before the magistrate.

When I hear the word “technicality” I think of American jurisprudence.
If there is any such term used in British courts I never heard it. The
procedure in this magistrate’s court was simple, alarmingly simple. The
hotel man proved the burglary. The next witness, an old prospector who
was wintering at the hotel, testified that he had changed a
twenty-dollar bill at the hotel bar the evening before the burglary;
that it was the only bill of that denomination he had; that he had
carried it with him for six months and had looked at it so many times he
remembered the big serial numbers on the back of it. He swore further
that he went to the hotel man the next morning and gave him the numbers.
The arresting officers now told of following the train, getting the
conductor’s statement, and arresting me. They produced the fatal
twenty-dollar bill, the only one in the roll that could have hurt me,
the prospector’s bill. They testified that they got it from the
conductor, who told them I had paid my fare out of it.

The prospector now identified his bill. On top of this it was shown that
I had suddenly and suspiciously left the town, avoiding the ticket
office and paying cash fare with the deadly twenty.

I hadn’t a leg to stand on in the way of defense, but managed to get up
and object to hearsay evidence and ask to have the conductor brought
into court.  The magistrate and Crown prosecutor laughed. “He’ll appear
when you go on trial at the next term of court,” said the “cutor.” “Any
defense?” asked the magistrate.

I saw they had me right. “No, your worship, I’ll save my defense till I
get into a court where I will not be laughed at.” He laughed again and
made the order to hold me. This court proceeding didn’t take an hour. I
went back to the jail wishing the thing had happened in the good old
U.S.A., where, with a smart lawyer, I would have got a continuance and
sent somebody to the conductor who might listen to reason and not be so
cocksure about getting the bill from me.

At the provincial jail I found a drunken Scotchman in charge. He was
assisted by two half-breed Indian boys serving six months each. One of
them cooked for the jailer and any prisoners that came in; the other
scrubbed the jail. Both of them watched me faithfully and fed me
regularly when the jailer was drunk. I was locked in a cell and never
got out except for a bath once a week. The Indian boys slept on the
floor in front of my cell by a big stove that was always hot and kept
the jail warm.

There was not a fixture in the cell but a bucket. I had plenty of
blankets and slept on the floor. My clothes were taken and I was dressed
in a pair of white duck pants and a hickory shirt. They left me my shoes
and hat. I was never so bare and helpless before or since. Not a smoke,
nor a paper, book, nor magazine was allowed in the jail. When I asked
the Scotchman for something to read, he got me a Bible, which I read and
re-read with much interest but no profit. I was pestered daily for weeks
by the Crown prosecutor to return the balance of the money taken from
the hotel safe, eight hundred dollars. He offered me a short jail
sentence if I would give it up, but I mistrusted him and decided to let
some car cleaner find it rather than admit anything and get myself in
deeper.

I gave my case a good thinking over and concluded there was no way out.
Judge Powers, J. Hamilton Lewis, and Tom Patterson of Colorado, all
rolled into one, couldn’t have acquitted me. All day, every day, I read
my Bible and prayed that the conductor might fall under his train before
the day of my trial.

A priest visited the jail one day and gave me a pamphlet on which he had
printed the Chinook language. In answer to my question he told me it
contained about three hundred words—nouns, verbs, and adjectives. It was
created by the Hudson Bay traders, years before, and taught to all the
Northwest Indians to simplify trading with the different tribes.

I soon mastered Chinook, practicing on the two “breed” boys and any
Indians that happened into the jail. I had given up hope of escape. I
was bare-handed. Even the tin spoon I ate my stew with was taken away
when the meal was finished. The jailer disliked me from the first. He
would come into the jail corridor roaring drunk at night, rout out the
two “breeds,” and have them unlock my cell and search “the damned Yank,”
while he stood away brandishing a big gun. They never found anything;
there was nothing there.

One day he came in with a scared-looking China boy about twenty years
old. “Yank, here’s a cellmate for you.” He locked the Chinese in,
thinking he was punishing me. The China boy later proved the jailer’s
undoing and my deliverance. He knew some Chinook, but not one word of
English. I learned from the Indian trusty that he was held for trial,
charged with stealing a considerable sum of money from his employer, and
that his case was about as hopeless as mine.

We got along great. I taught him the alphabet and many words of English
while he instructed me in Chinese. I even humbled myself to ask the
jailer for pencil and paper to teach the Chink writing. He went down
to his office at once and brought me a lead pencil and pad of paper. I
was surprised, and so grateful I thanked him half a dozen times.

Inside of a week he got drunk and ordered his Indians to take them away
from me. I asked him no more for anything, and to this day I believe he
gave them to me anticipating the warm, grateful, pleasant thrill he
would get from depriving me of them.

The China boy’s company got him a lawyer. When he came to the jail he
called me out and offered to take my case. I could have got money by
writing to Salt Chunk Mary, but it looked like waste to fight it.  When
I asked him straight out if he could do anything with the conductor, he
was shocked, indignant.  “Oh, ah, but, my man! Tamper with the Crown’s
witness, what?” He left as if I had the plague, and I don’t doubt he
reported me to the prosecutor.

I’ve had a lot of dealings with Chinamen and never got the worst of it
from one. If a Chinese doesn’t like you he will keep away from you; if
he does like you he will go the route. By signs and a few words I
conveyed to my cellmate that our only hope was to beat the jail. There
was a barred window in our cell, the outside was not guarded. All we
needed was a hack saw. He was for it. His “cousins” visited him
regularly every week and if they could be made to understand what we
needed they would get it.

There was but one hardware store in the town and to buy the saws there
might cause talk. I had him tell his “cousins” to send to Vancouver to
their company for them. After weeks of anxiety and uncertainty and much
negotiating with their friends at Vancouver the precious saws were put
into my cellmate’s hands under the drunken jailer’s nose. My plan was
simple. Wait till spring when, if we got out and failed to get a train
we could take a chance on foot in the country away from the railroad.
Night after night we listened to the trains arriving and departing,
checking the time. A freight train departed immediately after the one
o’clock passenger. If I could “spring” into a box car, we could make
Vancouver in safety. I secreted the saws and we settled down to wait for
softer weather.




CHAPTER XVII


When spring came, my Chinese “tillicum,” which is Chinook for friend,
and I were the only felony prisoners in the “skookum house,” or jail.
The two half-breeds had finished their time and a couple of others had
been brought in to take their places, four prisoners in all. The Indians
watched us and we watched them. The tough end of our job was not to beat
the jail or the drunken jailer, but the watchful trusties, our fellow
prisoners.

I decided to cut the bars in the daytime and have my cellmate keep a
lookout at the door against the appearance of our jailer or the Indians.
The saws were dug up out of a crack and day after day, slowly,
noiselessly, they bit into the thick bars. At night I put them away
safely in their hiding place, and we slept as usual. Our jailer drank
more and more, and we were searched oftener, but never once did he or
his Indians look at the bars in our window. We were so closely watched
and the jail was so tight the thought of our getting anything to “crush
out” with never entered his foggy mind.

Strangely enough the China boy’s “cousins” never appeared at the jail
after the day they brought him the saws. Whether they were afraid or
thought they had done enough for him I never knew. To all my queries
about them he “no sabied.” At the start I had figured on help in the way
of money and food from them. Now I had to dismiss this. I determined not
to go near the Chinese if we got out, but to get into a train and stay
in it till hunger forced me out.

After weary weeks the work was done; the bars cut so nearly through I
was afraid they would fall out every time the cell door was slammed
shut. I hid the worn saws, and waited patiently till our jailer got
drunk and gave us our searching. On those nights he never made a second
appearance. Satisfied, he always went direct to bed and we could hear
his alcoholic snores in another part of the building. The Indian
trusties went to sleep and I rolled our blankets into dummies that
looked passable. At twelve o’clock the freight train pulled in and went
on a side track to get a fresh engine and allow the passenger train to
go by at one o’clock. I broke the bars out and hid them under the
blankets. The China boy’s knees were shaking as he crawled out and
dropped to the ground. I followed him, not any too calm and cool myself.
He had no hat, otherwise he was dressed as I was—duck pants and a thin
shirt.

There was no time to try to steal clothing, food, or money. As we
hurried toward the freight yards where the train stood I had but one
comforting thought—we wouldn’t be missed till seven in the morning.

The Chinaman was helpless. At the side track I ran frantically about in
search of something to spring a car door with. At last I found a pile of
scrap iron and dug a fishplate out of it. The train was an all-through
freight, billed to Vancouver, the terminus.  I soon discovered a
battered box car that suited, and sprang a side door away from its
bearings. Then I showed the Chinaman the end door and tried to explain
to him, mostly by signs, that he should get in the side door while I
pulled it out, and then unfasten the end door from the inside to admit
me after I put the side door back in place. He refused to budge. At last
I made him pull the door out while I got into the car. When I got the
end door open I had to get out, go down, and get him and put him in.
Then I sprang the side door back in position, went to the end door,
crawled in, and fastened it on the inside the way I found it.

We didn’t have a pocketknife, not a dime, not a match; but we were safe,
and I wouldn’t have exchanged the security of that box car for a soft
berth in the sleeper on the departing passenger train. We were barely
settled inside when there was a bumping and jolting of cars and our
train slowly got under way. We were in a car loaded with barrels of
lime.  They stood on end and it was painful to stretch out on them. The
ride was a nightmare. Hungry, thirsty, cold, racked with fear and
suspense, we got into Vancouver after twenty-four hours.

Clothes were the first problem, any kind of rags to cover our jail
uniforms. I got out of the car with the half-dead China boy at once, and
went directly back to the caboose on the train we rode. The conductor
and brakeman were already gone. The caboose was deserted. The boy hid
between box cars while I went to the top of the caboose, through the
cupola, and down inside. In a locker were greasy coats and pants, and a
cap for the Chink. The clothes were too big for him and the cap too
small. He knew Vancouver and wanted to take me to his “cousins” in
Chinatown, but I was afraid we couldn’t get by a copper together, so he
struck out alone after making me promise to hunt him up at his company’s
headquarters. I crawled into an empty car to wait for daylight, when it
would be safer to go through the streets.

It was Sunday morning. I heard a church bell ring and knew it was
somewhere around six o’clock. When I looked out of the car I saw that a
heavy fog had settled over the city like a blessed benediction. I melted
into it, making my way out of the freight yards and into the streets.
The fog was so dense that I couldn’t have found my way if I had known
the town.  After walking blocks along a street I saw that the stores
were getting smaller and farther apart. Vacant lots became more numerous
and everything indicated that I was going in the wrong direction. A few
doors ahead of me an old, rheumatic, mongrel dog appeared out of a
hallway. He was the only living thing in sight, and when I got abreast
of him I stopped and looked at him idly. He came over to me, gave me a
rather doubtful look, and sat back on his haunches.  After balancing
himself carefully, he lifted a stiff hind leg and made a futile effort
to dislodge the hungry fleas from under his collar. Failing at this, he
got up slowly, gave me another looking-over, and limped back to his
doorway. As he went in he glanced at me out of the tail of his eye.

It sounds strange to say that I was suspicious of a mangy, old cur dog;
but it’s true. There was something so human in his glance that I
followed him into the doorway to see what he was up to.

In the entrance behind the door, with his head on the lower step, a man
was sprawled. A second look convinced me that he was a Saturday night
drunk who had got that far and no farther. He was lying on his back,
open-mouthed, and breathing heavily. The old dog stood beside him
watching me.

I could see he was a workingman and ordinarily wouldn’t have given him a
look, but I was now broke, hungry, wolfish. The dog growled a feeble
protest as I began exploring his master’s clothes. He had money in every
pocket. I left some silver in his vest for him to get a drink with when
he woke up. The devoted old mongrel stood in the door as if to bar me
from going out, and eyed me reproachfully when I gently pushed him
aside.

Out in the street I cleansed my conscience by repeating the
Sanctimonious Kid’s favorite parody: “Oh, room rent, what crimes are
committed in thy name!”

Turning the nearest corner, a glance over my shoulder showed me the
loyal dog out on the sidewalk, still accusing me with his tired old
eyes. The town was awake now and I soon found a sailor’s boarding house
where I got a couple of bracing drinks and sat at a long table where
sailors and stevedores were breakfasting in free-for-all, family style.
I didn’t join in the conversation, didn’t have to. The quantity of food
I put away convinced them I belonged on the water front.  Paying for a
room in the place, I got into it and took stock. There was enough money
to get an outfit of clothes and feed me for a couple of weeks. I made a
bundle of the jail pants and threw it off a wharf at once. The next day
I bought new clothes, shoes, and hat, got cleaned up, and, dismissing
the burglary charge and broken jail from my mind, proceeded to look
about me.

I had not been photographed or measured in the small town I escaped
from; it didn’t look reasonable that the authorities would travel five
hundred miles on the chance of finding me in Vancouver, so I decided to
stay there till I could get hold of something worth while. Moreover I
was curious to know how my Chinese cellmate had fared, and being young
and somewhat fond of myself, perhaps I wanted to meet his “cousins” and
be admired by them.

After looking over the town, my experience told me the police were not
to be feared and I went into Chinatown in search of my friend. Finding
the company store he described, I went in and bought a small package of
ginger candy. About a dozen Chinese were sitting around, talking or
playing dominos, but the minute I appeared the dominos quit rattling and
the Chinese stopped talking. I looked as mysterious as I could without
making it too strong and surveyed them one by one. Not one uttered a
syllable till I went out; then they all fell to talking and
gesticulating at once. The following night I went back and bought more
candy. A smart-looking, middle-aged Chinaman in European clothes was
behind the counter.

“What you come here for?” he asked in very good English.

“I look for Chew Chee, China boy, my friend. We come Vancouver Sunday
morning in box car.  Before—we stop skookum house. Skookum house not
very ‘skookum’ we come Vancouver—very cold, very hungry. Chew Chee tell
me come this house. All right—I come. Now I go. Good-by!”

He remained silent, his face expressionless to me.  I knew the Chinese
mistrust of white men, and many of their good reasons for it, and was
not offended or discouraged. He was protecting his countryman; I admired
him for it. At the door I gave him a final dig. “My friend tell me come
your house; I come.  You think me ‘luc zhe.’ You very smart man. You
think me policeman. All right. Good-by!”

This was too much for the stoical Chinaman. He followed me out and,
catching up, said in a low voice: “You no ‘luc zhe’; you good man. You
come ‘fi fi’ (quickly).”

I followed him into the next block, then down a narrow, dark lane
between buildings and up shaky stairs where he knocked on a door. An old
man admitted us and barred the door. The place was a big loft. The foggy
air was hot, stifling, and laden with every Chinese smell—opium,
tobacco, fish, and damp clothes drying. Chinamen were cooking, eating,
smoking hop, gambling, or sleeping in curtained bunks that lined the
walls. My conductor was evidently a considerable person. Silence fell on
the room, and many Chinamen stood still in submissive attitudes.

He threw a mangy old cat out of a broken chair near the big stove in the
middle of the room and told me to sit. After a few jerky gutturals to
the old man that let us in, he disappeared in the haze of smoke.  The
gambling and chatter started again. Some of the younger Chinese passed
and looked at me curiously.

I sat by the stove and watched the scene with interest. An old
Chinaman—he must have been sixty—shuffled by me hastily with a hop
layout and spread it in a near-by bunk. He was shaking with the “yen
yen,” the hop habit. His withered, clawlike hands trembled as he
feverishly rolled the first “pill,” a large one. His burning eyes
devoured it. Half cooked, he stuck the pill in its place and turning his
pipe to the lamp greedily sucked the smoke into his lungs. Now, with a
long, grateful exhalation, the smoke is discharged, the cramped limbs
relax and straighten out, the smoker heaves a sigh of satisfaction, and
the hands, no longer shaking, turn with surer touch to another “pill.”
This is smaller, rolled and shaped with more care, better cooked, and
inhaled with a slow “long draw.” Each succeeding pill is smaller, more
carefully browned over the lamp, and smoked with increased pleasure. At
last the little horn container, the “hop toy,” is empty. The last pill
is finished with perfect stroke and flourish, the bamboo pipe is put
aside with caressing touch, the lamp blown out with gentle breath, and
the devotee, sighing softly, curls himself up for pleasant dreams.

I was so intent on watching the old man’s magic transformation from a
shattered wreck into a sleeping cherub that the boss Chinaman’s return
escaped me.  He touched my shoulder and I followed him into a small room
in a rear corner of the loft, where I found Chew Chee. He shook my hand
awkwardly. His English was almost forgotten. All he could say was, “You
good man, you good man.”

The boss Chinaman was full of business. He drew out some American gold
pieces. “I pay you. Chew Chee pay me some time.”

I explained to him that I had not come for money; that I was there to
see Chew Chee and make friends of his friends, and that if I ever needed
money or help I would ask for it and expect it.

“Well, then,” he said, returning the gold to his pocket, “I give you
China letter to my company man.  You come my store to-morrow night.”

He went away and Chew Chee insisted that I go with him and meet his
“cousins.” We walked across the city to a laundry where I was royally
received.  Chew Chee was the only Chinese that had a word of English,
but the party was a success anyway. They produced their finest liquor,
their lichee nuts, their daintiest cakes, and choicest tea. The hop
layout was spread, and Chew Chee rolled and toasted me a pill that I
smoked just by way of being a sociable, good fellow. The pill made me
drowsy. A bunk was prepared and I slept out the night peacefully and
safely in the midst of my friends. I bade Chew Chee good-by in the
morning, and never saw him again.

That night, having nothing else to do, I went down to the China store.
The boss had my letter ready.  I thanked him for it, and putting it in
my pocket gave it no further thought. And yet that letter snatched me
clear of the law’s clutches on a night when I was caught in a burglary,
overpowered, hog-tied, and waiting for “the wagon.”

I marvel to this day I did not quit my stealing right then and there. I
had all the best of it. I had escaped a sure conviction and sentence. I
could have returned to the “American side” and the Canadian authorities
would have given me good riddance. Yet the thought of turning to the
right, squaring myself, and starting anew never entered my mind.
Probably youthful egotism, which is nothing but confidence born of
ignorance, whispered to me that I could beat a game I knew to be wrong
and full of dangers. So without stopping to cast up accounts or take
stock, I blithely looked about me for fresh endeavors. My money was fast
dwindling, more must be had; and nightly I prowled the town with the
single purpose of locating anything I could do by myself.

It’s difficult to explain to a layman the pride of a professional thief.
Nevertheless he must have pride or he would steal his clothes, beat his
board bills, and borrow money with no thought of repaying it. He doesn’t
do those things day after day, but day after day he takes chances and is
proud that he can keep his end up and pay for the things he needs. All
wrong, of course, but there it is. If I had had brains enough to
grease a griddle, I would have taken a hundred dollars from the boss
Chinaman in the matter of Chew Chee and gone off somewhere, got a job,
and tried to do the right thing by myself and others. But no, I was a
journeyman; I had served a long and careful apprenticeship;
professional pride—I don’t know what else to call it—would not permit
me to take the Chinaman’s money for rescuing him from our common
enemy, the law, and I went out to get money in my own way.

I was wrong. I knew I was wrong, and yet I persisted. If that is
possible of any explanation it is this: From the day I left my father my
lines had been cast, or I cast them myself, among crooked people. I had
not spent one hour in the company of an honest person. I had lived in an
atmosphere of larceny, theft, crime. I thought in terms of theft. Houses
were built to be burglarized, citizens were to be robbed, police to be
avoided and hated, stool pigeons to be chastised, and thieves to be
cultivated and protected.  That was my code; the code of my companions.
That was the atmosphere I breathed. “If you live with wolves, you will
learn to howl.”

In my rambles about Vancouver, I met an acquaintance from Salt Lake. He
and his wife were exiled from the Mormon city and could not return in
safety till they got a “bunch of trouble fixed up.” He fell on my neck,
saying: “Just the party I’m looking for.  I’ve got something soft for
you; you can’t go wrong.” He invited me to his quarters, a cottage they
had rented. They were both “smokers,” and over the hop he explained the
“soft” thing.

His wife, in buying a can of hop, had tendered the Chinese storekeeper a
large bill. When he went into a rear room for the change, she saw that
he had his money in a box concealed beneath the floor. He made a
purchase later and verified her story.

“That’s all there is to it,” he said. “All you’ve got to do is go get
it.”

I investigated and found that his story wasn’t altogether the rosy dream
of a hop fiend. The storekeeper, an elderly Chinaman, did keep his money
in a box under the floor, but he slept on top of it at night and in a
room adjoining about a dozen Chinese laundry hands slept in bunks. It
didn’t look a bit soft to me. I convinced myself that the money was
there, and that I could get into the place, but that was all I could be
reasonably sure of.

My friend’s wife was a resourceful woman.  “Chloroform him, that’s easy.
I’ll get you the chloroform,” she cried.

I hesitated about that. I was practical, I knew nothing about
chloroforming people. Sanc had never once mentioned chloroform and what
he knew about burglary was plenty. In searching my mind for something to
guide me I recalled having met a talkative chap in Chicago at California
Jack’s hop joint, who told me in great detail about his “ether outfit,”
how he injected the fluid through keyholes, putting his victims out
before going into their rooms, how he chloroformed women sleepers by
holding a saturated handkerchief to their noses, and how he stripped
their fingers of rings while they were stupefied. I remembered his talk
didn’t ring just right and that he borrowed two dollars from me at the
finish and never paid them. I had long since dismissed him from my mind
as a magazine burglar, a reader and rehasher of crime stories,
embellished and embroidered by daily devotion to the bamboo pipe.

Still his talk kept in my mind. There might be something in it. The old
Chinaman had money there; I needed it. I was ambitious to learn.
Chloroform seemed to be the only way and I decided to try it.  I gave
the place a final looking-over. It was a one-story shack between two
larger buildings. A storeroom in front with its long counter, and
shelves on both sides filled with merchandise, a small room directly
back of it where the storekeeper slept on his pallet. I made sure of
that by rousing him early one morning to make a purchase. The big rear
room accommodated the Chinese laundry hands.

My friend’s wife delivered the chloroform and a clean handkerchief. I
rehearsed the whole business in my mind, and, feeling reasonably safe,
put it to the touch. An open window let me into the bunk room, where I
unfastened the back door, for a getaway.

On a long table in the center of the room a metal lamp in a dish burned
dimly. The tired laundrymen snored or breathed heavily. Here a muscular
brown arm hung limply over the side of a bunk below the curtain, and
there a foot protruded. The door to the old man’s room was open, and I
stood there a long time till I could pick out his gentle, regular
breathing from the chorus of wheezes, grunts, and snores in the bunk
room. I had hoped to find him lying on his back. I don’t know just why,
but that was the way I had him in my rehearsals. Sure enough he was in
that position, sleeping like a baby.

Holding the handkerchief at arm’s length, I saturated it liberally with
the chloroform and returned the bottle to my pocket. Then I knelt beside
him and held the handkerchief above his nostrils. With the first breath
of it he stirred uneasily, and slowly turned over, facing the wall. Here
was something I hadn’t anticipated. I was sure he hadn’t enough; he
breathed regularly again. I must give him more. Reaching over him, I
held the stuff near his nose as before. One whiff, and he floundered
away from it, turning over, facing me, but still asleep.

I grew alarmed. This tossing from side to side would soon wake him. I
thought of giving it up and going away quietly. My heart was pounding
with the suspense. It seemed to grow and expand till it filled my chest
and almost stopped my breath. I must go through with it. Carefully this
time, I held the handkerchief near his face with both hands. His body
twitched nervously now. His breathing was labored.  I was sure of him,
and held it closer.

With a scream that woke every Chinaman in the bunk room, he sat bolt
upright, and throwing his arms out fastened his clawlike fingers in my
clothes.

Believing he was about to be murdered, the old man fought and screamed
in a frenzy of fear. I saw red-handed capture in front of me, and tried
desperately to throttle him. The noise of our struggle had roused the
sleepers in the back room and I could hear their startled cries as they
dropped out of their bunks. I had no thought of the money now; it was a
question of getting away. Just when the old man was exhausted and I was
in a fair way to get out of his clutches, some of the more daring
Chinamen from the back room rushed in. I got a blow on the head that
knocked me half out, and they fell on me like a pack of wolves,
smothering me with kicks, cuffs, digs, and scratches. The whole thing
was over quicker than I can write it. I was stretched out on my back on
the floor with two Chinamen holding each of my arms down, two sitting on
each leg, and another with both hands in my hair. They all chattered at
once. Then one came with a lamp, and I was inspected curiously, like
some strange, fearsome monster that had been trapped.

The old man, now recovered from the battle, gave a sharp order. A short,
muscular, knotty-legged China boy went to the back room and returned
with a rope. I was carefully raised to a sitting position and my arms
held to my sides while the boy threw a couple of half hitches around my
body, pinioning me safely. The rope was then run to my ankles, where he
deftly tied some more strange and wonderful Chinese knots, and I was
secured; scratched, bruised, bleeding, and asking myself if they were
going to send for the police or execute me on the spot.

Another order from the boss and they lifted me bodily and sat me on a
box in the corner of the little room. They stood by, eyeing me in
silence now. The old man sat on his pallet. There was an odor of
chloroform in the room, but he did not appear to be any the worse for
what he had inhaled. Our struggle had probably worn it off. He picked
the handkerchief from the floor where it had fallen and sniffed it.

Holding it out toward me, he asked in fair English: “What for, him?”

Something told me I had a chance yet. I decided to tell the old man the
truth. “Him medicine,” I answered.

“What for medicine?”

“Make you sleep.”

“What for sleep?”

“I think maybe take your money.”

“How you know me money?”

“I come your store; I look see.”

He got up, rolled his blankets away, and, raising up the small trapdoor
in the floor, opened his box and made sure that it had not been
disturbed. They all began talking again. I heard the fatal words “luc
zhe,” “luc zhe,” which means policeman.

In desperation I cried, “No, no, no luc zhe. Him no good. I got plenty
good China friends. Me good friend Chew Chee, China boy. Before—Chew
Chee stop ‘skookum house’ I bring him Vancouver. Me good man.” I
remembered my Chinese letter and cried out desperately: “You look my
pocket; you see China letter; him good letter. You look my pocket.”

The name of Chew Chee was like magic on them.  They became silent and
listened closely to my talk.  I was tied up so that I couldn’t reach the
vest pocket the letter was in, but I managed to touch it with a finger.
“You look my pocket,” I cried frantically to the old man.

He came over to where I sat on the box and gingerly put his fingers into
the pocket, bringing out the letter.  By the lamplight he studied it
long and carefully.  Others then read it, and the powwowing started
again, while I sat listening for the fatal “luc zhe,” and picturing
myself back in the jail I had so lately escaped from. The boss now got a
box and sat opposite me with the letter in his hand and a thoughtful,
puzzled look on his leathery, wrinkled old face. The other Chinamen
stood behind him, silent again. I saw I was going to be tried or
examined, and hoping for an out, I began to figure some kind of a
defense.

His accusing words bit into me like an acid. They were laden with scorn.
I turned hot with shame and confusion. Tapping the letter with a long,
bony finger, he said: “Him letter talk you good man. What for, you good
man?”

These were short, plain words and called for a plain answer. No use
trying to deceive this old man after trying to rob him. No use putting
up a crying talk for mercy. I could see he scorned me as a robber, a
thief in the night, and made up my mind not to bring more contempt upon
myself by pleading weakly and in fear. I answered him as I imagined he
would have answered me if by any chance our positions had been reversed.

“Maybe me good man,” I said. “Maybe bad man, I no know. Long time
policeman make me plenty trouble. Long time I stop jail house. Then I
come Vancouver. No more money, no more eat. I look see your money, I
come your house steal your money.  No can do; you catch me. You send me
jail house, long time me no come home. More better you kill me now.
Policeman talk me bad man; plenty Chinaman talk me good man. Maybe good
man, maybe bad man; I no know.”

I spoke firmly, looking him in the eyes frankly, and finished my
argument for the defense with as much force and feeling as any barrister
ever put into a plea for a client’s life. His face was blank as a board.
His little brownish-black eyes were fastened on mine, but I saw no hope
in them. I couldn’t even tell whether he had understood what I said.
After studying me for a long time he turned and said something to one of
his boys. The boy went into the bunk room and came back with a heavy
meat cleaver that the Chinese use to chop pork and fowl. Another order
and I was lifted, box and all, out of the corner and placed in the
middle of the room. The China boy with the cleaver stepped behind me.

Something in the pit of my stomach seemed to collapse. I tried to say
something to the old boss, but the words wouldn’t come; they just
rattled around in my throat. The old man bored into me with his eyes
like a blacksnake “charming” a bird. Suddenly he uttered a short, sharp
exclamation that sounded like “Chut.” I snatched my eyes away from his
and closed them, prepared for the fatal blow that my guilty mind told me
was about to fall on my head from behind.  The blow did not fall, but I
was almost dead anyway and swayed on my box till the China boys had to
support me. I felt a fumbling at my ankles and opened my eyes to find
the knotty-legged boy kneeling at my feet, untying his knots. When the
rope was taken off me, I turned my head and saw the boy standing behind
me, holding his cleaver at “ready,” prepared to strike me down only if I
started anything rough. One of them handed me my hat. I put it on, and
stood up slowly and with an effort. The old man waved his arm toward the
back room.

“You go ou’,” he ordered sternly.

“My letter?” I asked meekly and respectfully.

“No more letter,” he said, crumpling it in his hand.

The Chinese boys stood aside as I started into the bunk room to go out
the back door. I was shamed, humiliated, covered with confusion. Turning
back, I took off my hat, and facing the old man held up my right hand.

“If I ever rob another Chink I hope to rot in the gutter.” I was so
intent on expressing my gratitude that I forgot my Chinese lingo.

He understood no word of it, I’m sure, but pointed again to the back.
“You go ou’.”

I went out, humble and crestfallen. In the alley I threw the bottle of
chloroform against a building, and its crash somewhat relieved my
feelings. That was my first and last experience with chloroform as an
aid to burglary. As an agent for stupefying a sleeping person without
waking him, I maintain, in spite of the opinions of fiction writers and
romancing thieves, “it can’t be done.” Making my way to the cottage of
my Salt Lake friends who had promoted me, I reported my disastrous and
humiliating failure. Had they been inclined to entertain any doubts
about my story, my appearance would have set them at rest. I was
scratched, clawed, bruised, and had a big lump on my head.

They were very sympathetic. I was invited to “stick around a few days”
till they could look up something else for me. I excused myself as
tactfully as possible, resolving to locate my own work from there on. I
went to my room and to bed, and stayed there several days because of the
terrible mauling the Chinamen had given me. Yet, with all this, I
couldn’t but respect them for letting me go free, heaping coals of fire
on my guilty head. I remembered Smiler and our resolve never to pester
another Mormon when we had been captured in the Temple yard and
released. I vowed never to molest another Chinaman, and never since have
I imposed upon one except on one occasion, and that was under great
necessity.

Years after, I got out of a train at Cheyenne, racked with the opium
habit, after an all-day ride to escape the Denver police. Making a hasty
survey of the gambling houses and joints I failed to find anybody I knew
who could direct me to a place to “smoke.” It was almost midnight, cold
and storming, and I set out to find a laundry. There was one near by,
the laundrymen were resting after the day’s toil, and through the glass
door I saw one lying in his bunk, smoking his day’s ration of hop. The
door was locked, and they refused to open up for me.

No hop fiend’s wits ever fail to work when the “yen yen” arrives. In
desperation I hastened to one of the gambling houses, and going into a
rear room took off my vest and wrapped it in a newspaper. Hurrying out,
I got a messenger and gave him fifty cents to take the bundle to the
Chinese laundry. I was at his heels. The Chinamen seeing what they
thought was a parcel of laundry opened the door and I shouldered myself
in behind the boy. Once inside, I took my vest away from him and going
directly to the bunk where the smoker lay threw down some silver,
explaining what I wanted. The smoker turned out to be the boss
laundryman. The sight of my money mollified him somewhat, and after much
protesting and objecting he let me lie down on his bunk and smoke my
fill. In an hour we were friends. He explained that he refused to open
the door because he thought I was a “ketchum money man”—a robber.

In the days of my sad experience at the Chinese store, Vancouver was a
much smaller town than it is now. There were few opportunities worth
while, and I decided to leave. Moreover every Chinese store, laundry,
and business house reminded me of that disastrous night. I was afraid
of bumping into Chew Chee or the boss Chinaman that had given me the
letter. I was sure they had heard about it, and didn’t want to face
them. I was nearly broke again, and had to bestir myself.

The American side seemed the only place to go, and not having enough
money to buy a ticket, I went down to the railroad yards to get a train.
The blind baggage, or “stormy end” as the bums call it, was so crowded
when the train pulled out that I saw they would all be thrown off at the
first stop. I didn’t want to get underneath on the rods and ruin my
clothes for a short jump of fifty miles to the junction, so I got on top
of a coach. Something must have been wrong with the engine, for there
was one continual shower of red-hot cinders falling on me that burned
holes in my clothes, ruining them and blistering my skin.

At the first stop I got down, intending to go in a coach and steal a hat
check, or crawl under a seat out of sight. Looking about I saw that the
last coach was in darkness, and thinking it was a dead, empty car, I
waited till it came along and boarded the front end, hoping to find the
door unlocked. The door opened to my touch, but when I went inside I
found myself in a luxuriously furnished private car instead of a dead
coach.

There are only three degrees of tough luck—bad, worse, and worst. When
you reach the worst you have the satisfaction of knowing that if your
luck changes it has to change for the better. I considered my Waterloo
at the Chinese store the direst degree of bad luck. Not only had I lost
a big bunch of money; I was hurt somewhere else.

At that time I thought it was my professional pride that suffered
because of failure. Now I know I was hurt because the old Chinaman had
shown himself so superior to me. If he had sent me to jail I would have
done my time and forgotten him, but to this day thinking about him and
writing about him make me feel uneasy. I wonder what I would have done
had he made me promise to quit stealing?

But I was in this private car, feeling that my luck was due for a
change, and with a chance to heal my wounded pride. The air inside the
car was warm, live, vibrating. I sensed an occupant. Making my way along
the aisle toward a stateroom at the far end, I looked about closely for
an attendant but there was none in sight. The stateroom door was open,
with a chair against it, probably for better ventilation.  A heavily
shaded lamp was burning, and by its soft light I saw the form of a big
man rolled in the blankets on a broad berth. His back was toward the
door, and nothing but a shock of coarse gray hair showed above the
covers. A glance told me I was in the presence of power, wealth,
affluence. I hadn’t enough money to pay for that man’s breakfast.

On a small table at the head of the sleeper’s berth there was a large
silver pitcher, a glass, two books, a fat leather pocketbook, a thick
bill fold, a pocket purse, and a heavy gold watch, with a small, black
ribbon guard. I took all the articles except the pitcher, glass, and
books, and started for the door I entered, praying that the attendant
wouldn’t appear.  I saw nothing of him, and concluded he was somewhere
forward, gossiping or shooting dice with the porters.

It was but a minute’s work to get back upon the top of a coach, where I
lay and let the cinders do their worst. The next stop was a junction,
where I intended to get off and cross the line into Washington.  The
only train in sight was a westbound passenger waiting on a sidetrack. I
was afraid to hang around, and when it pulled out I went underneath on
the rods and got back into Vancouver after an absence of five hours. I
planted the watch in the railroad yards, and never saw it again.

On my way uptown to get a room, I emptied the bill fold and purse,
throwing them away. In the room I looked over the money, and found I had
enough to keep me six months, if I kept away from the faro tables.

The fat pocketbook held no money, but was bulging with valuable personal
papers. Looking through them I saw that their owner was one of the
higher officials of the Canadian Pacific Railway. I realized there would
be a terrific roar in the morning, and was on the point of burning the
papers and destroying the pocketbook when the thought came to me that I
could gain nothing by that, while I would be causing the owner an
immense loss and no end of inconvenience. I secreted the pocketbook in
the rear of the hotel, and went to bed trying to think up some safe way
of returning it to the owner. No use in inflicting a profitless injury
on him; and its return might take the sharp edge off his resentment.




CHAPTER XVIII


Discarding my cinder-burnt clothes for a new outfit the next day, I
bought a ticket for Victoria, B.C.  On my way to the boat that evening I
dropped the fat pocketbook into a mail box, where I knew it would be
found, then examined, and returned to the loser.

When I first began stealing I had but a dim realization of its wrong. I
accepted it as the thing to do because it was done by the people I was
with; besides, it was adventurous and thrilling. Later it became an
everyday, cold-blooded business, and while I went about it methodically,
accepting the dangers and privations it entailed, I was fully aware of
the gravity of my offenses. Every time I stole a dollar I knew I was
breaking a law and working a hardship on the loser.  Yet for years I
kept on doing it. I wonder how many of us quit wronging others for the
best reason of all—because it is wrong, and we know it. Any thief that
can’t or doesn’t put himself in his victim’s place, in the place of the
copper that pinches him, or in the place of the judge who sentences him,
is not a complete thief. His narrow-mindedness will prevent him from
doing his best work and also shut him off from opportunities to help and
protect himself when he is laid by the heels.

Nobody wants to live and die a criminal. They all hope to quit some day,
usually when it’s almost too late. I will say right here to any thief
who thinks of quitting that if he can put himself in the other fellow’s
place he has something substantial to start on; and if he can’t do it,
he’ll never get anywhere.

I always figured that when I had a man’s money or valuables he had
suffered enough. What sense in destroying his personal papers, or
keeping heirlooms of no value except to him, or subjecting him to any
loss that would be profitless to me? In the case of this sleeper in his
private car, I saw the money and watch meant little to him. The papers
meant much.  On top of that, his peace of mind was disturbed, and his
sense of safety and security shattered. He would probably lock his doors
and sleep in a stuffy room the balance of his life, another great
hardship. I had his valuables and intended to keep them. I could not
restore his peace of mind or his sense of safety and security. I could
restore his papers, and, at some small risk, did. Had I been chased or
suspected I would have thrown them away, or in the fire without a
thought. I took his property coolly, impersonally, as a picker removes
the feathers from a fat goose. I returned his papers as the last touch
to a workman-like job, as the cabinetmaker softly gives the last nail
its last light tap.

To any thief who reads this and criticizes me as being over-thoughtful
of the “sucker,” I reply that he is probably one of those guys that
beats his victim up after robbing him; who strikes down women and
children if they get in his way; who destroys paintings, vases,
tapestries, and clothing wantonly, and winds up by letting some
housewife chase him under a bed, where she holds him with her broomstick
till the coppers arrive. He is not a thief, but a “mental case,” and
belongs in a psychopathic ward.

At Victoria I put in a few very pleasant months.  I joined the colony of
Chinese and opium smugglers who ran their freight across the line in
fast, small boats at night into Port Townsend, Anacortes, or Seattle,
Washington. The manufacture of smoking opium was then a legalized
industry in Canada, and the smugglers were welcomed and harbored because
they brought much American gold to the Canadian side. Being in the
company of these characters I was accepted by the police as one of them,
and went my way unmolested.

One fatal evening, as I stood watching a faro game making mental bets
and winning every one, the devilish hunch came to me that I was lucky
and ought to make a play. My resistance reached the vanishing point. I
made a bet, lost it, got stuck, and feverishly played in my last dollar.

This gambling habit is the curse of a thief’s life.  He loses his last
dime and is forced to go out in haste for more money. Like a mechanic
broke and out of a job, he takes the first one in sight. He has no time
to pick and choose, or calculate carefully what he is about; he must
eat, and the minute he goes broke he gets hungry. Gambling keeps him
broke, forces him to steal small money on short notice and take
prohibitive and unnatural chances.

I could have borrowed money enough to expense myself to Vancouver where
I had the valuable watch planted, but there had been such a cry in the
papers about the car burglary, the loser was so powerful and
influential, and the danger of trying to sell it so great, that I
decided to leave it there till later, and take it to the American side.

During my stay in Victoria I had strolled through the residence district
and noted several homes that looked prosperous and easy of approach.
House burglary was almost unknown there then; there was almost no police
protection, none was needed.  Householders left windows open and doors
unlocked.

One o’clock found me in one of the most pretentious places on my list,
but instead of picking up trifles right and left as I expected, I found
but one room occupied. Later I learned the family, with the exception of
the man of the house, was away for the summer. He was a good sleeper. I
took nothing but money, and not much of that—less than fifty dollars in
silver and bills—leaving his watch and some small articles of jewelry as
not worth the chances I must take in trying to dispose of them in a
strange town.

I went straight downtown to the only all-night bar and lunch counter to
eat before going to bed. Before I had my meal finished two officers and
two civilians came in and spoke to the sleepy bartender. He nodded
toward me and they all came over to where I sat eating. One of the
civilians looked at me closely and said to the other: “Looks very much
like the man; same clothes, same hat, same build, same height.”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“This,” spoke up the other. “If I am wrong you have an apology in
advance; if I am right you are in for it. I was robbed not an hour ago
in my bedroom in my house. This man, my servant, had occasion to get out
of bed and, while standing at a window in his room, saw the prowler
leaving stealthily by the rear way. Suspicious, he alarmed me, and I
discovered my loss. I brought these officers here on a bare chance that
the burglar might be here. You are the only one who has entered here,
except us, in the last hour. I do not accuse you. I ask you if you will
permit the officers to search you. If you are an honest man, you cannot
take offense.”

He was the man I had robbed; he was an Attorney; he was a smart man. I
was in a bad hole. If I objected to search it would look bad, and they
would do it anyway. “Certainly. Go ahead and search me,” I said, making
the best of a bad position. When the officers had finished searching me,
they counted the money.

“Lock him up,” ordered the lawyer. “He has the exact amount of money I
lost. The paper corresponds, and so does the silver.”

They handcuffed me. “You’re arrested in the name of the Crown, and
anything you say will be used against you.”

I was taken to the city prison where I gave the booking officer a very
brief and misleading biographical sketch. The jail I had fled from with
the China boy loomed before me and my only thought was to cover up. I
put in the balance of the night going over my case. It looked hopeless.
The next morning my cell was not unlocked when the other prisoners were
let out to wash. Later a jailer opened it, and a Siwash Indian boy
handed me a bucket of water and a towel.

When I reached for them the boy looked at me and I turned cold. He was
one of the watchful trusty prisoners at the jail I had escaped from. He
knew me.  This was the first of a long and bitter series of experiences
with stool pigeons, and in all my life I never witnessed a more
gratuitous, barefaced, conscienceless exhibition of snitching.

Without waiting to walk out of my sight he grabbed the jailer by the arm
and began pattering away in Chinook, pointing at me. He didn’t “spill
the beans.” He just kicked the pot over and put out the fire.

“To understand is to forgive,” it is said. I have long since forgiven
the numberless, noisy stool pigeons that beset my crooked path because I
don’t want any poison in my mind, but as yet I am unable to understand
them.

Immediately the jailer came back with another officer and they put a
very hefty pair of leg irons on me. At ten o’clock I was taken into the
magistrate’s court. The attachés and loungers crowded close and stared
at me curiously. The magistrate briefly and coldly remanded my case for
three days. A photographer waiting at the jail took a number of pictures
of me and I was locked up again. The jailer, a sad-eyed, solemn-faced
Scotchman, gazed at me a long time through the barred door and smacked
his lips as if enjoying the flavor of some delicious morsel or rare
wine.

In a voice that seemed to come out of a sepulcher he said: “You escaped
from the provincial jail in the town of ———.”

I already knew I was lost, but his solemn face and melancholy voice
conveyed to me, as he probably intended, the full force and effect of my
predicament.  He made me feel like one buried alive; his measured words
sounded to me like cold clods dropping on my coffin. I wasn’t taken out
of my cell and “sweated” or third-degreed, or beaten up. That looked bad
for me. The more a prisoner is questioned the less they know; the less
he is questioned the more they know.  If he is not questioned at all
they know it all, or enough. My captors asked me no questions; they
knew enough.

At the expiration of the three days I was remanded again. Then came
another remand, and before it expired the Scotch jailer I escaped from
appeared to take me back for trial where there was a cinch case against
me and the charge of jail breaking to boot.  The lawyer whose house I
entered and who so neatly trapped me came to the jail before I was taken
away.  He was a fine fellow, an Englishman, and to use an English
expression in describing him, I’ll say he was “a bit of all right.” He
brought me a book from his library, Charles Reade’s “It’s Never Too Late
to Mend.” He waived claim to the money found on me when I was arrested;
told the jailer to see that I got it and wished me luck with my case. He
neither lectured me nor asked any embarrassing questions.  Shaking my
hand heartily when he was leaving he said: “Do read that book, old man.
And, I say, I’m not intimating that you’re an authority on burglary, but
I thought you might tell me how I could prevent it in future.” I told
him to buy himself a dollar-and-a-half dog, and let him sleep in the
house.

He shook my hand again and thanked me. He was so downright decent and
charming that an outsider, observing our interview, would have thought
he had come to ask a favor of me, and was departing under a heavy
obligation. I was ashamed of going into his house and would have taken a
pledge not to rob any more Englishmen but it didn’t seem necessary. From
what I could see, there was a judge waiting in the jurisdiction I
escaped who would attend to that.

The Scotchman loaded me with irons, put me on a boat to Vancouver, then
on a train, and finally landed me back safely in his jail. He took the
Englishman’s book from me on the train and never gave it back.  I had no
chance to read the story till I got out of his clutches. Later I got it,
read it, and was fascinated and read every other book by the author that
I could lay hands on.

During my absence a new and securer cell had been built in the jail
because of our escape. It adjoined the jailer’s office, and its barred
door was directly in front of his desk, not six feet away. He moved a
camp cot into his office and slept where he could watch me.  Day after
day and night after night he drank his whisky, smoked his pipe, and
rustled his paper under my nose.

Chew Chee, the Chinese boy, had stolen two thousand dollars cash from
his employer. He told me he gambled it away before he got arrested. At
any rate, the money was never recovered. My jailer spread the report
around that I took the Chinese boy with me so I could get the two
thousand, after which I had murdered him and secreted his body. Whether
he believed it or only pretended to, I never knew.  He never questioned
me about Chew Chee, and now when he got drunk instead of calling me just
plain “damned Yank,” he chucked in another adjective, “murderous.” To
get even with him I began sleeping in the daytime and walking up and
down the cell all night, clanking the leg irons to keep him awake.  He
retaliated by prodding me with a long stick every time he caught me
sleeping in the daytime, and I gave it up.

He took my Bible away and when the Salvation Army came on Sunday I
reported it to them.  Somebody regulated him, and he grudgingly returned
it.

I had some thought of taking a jury trial. One never can tell what a
small-town jury will do.  Sometimes they carry their neighborhood feuds
into the jury room and the defendant gets a disagreement.  But after my
jailer spread his story about my murdering the China boy, I dismissed
the jury from my mind and decided to go before the court under the
Speedy Trials Act. A defendant electing for a speedy trial dispenses
with a jury and saves time and money for the community. A speedy trial
is almost equivalent to a plea of guilty, but when the defendant is
found guilty the court, in passing sentence, considers the fact that
there has been no expensive jury trial and is more lenient.

The Crown counsel called at the jail to ask what I wanted in the way of
a trial. I told him, and he had the witnesses subpœnaed for a certain
day. I could have got a young lawyer of the town with the money I
brought from Victoria, but it looked to me like a willful waste, and I
held it.

In due time the judge arrived at the town. My irons were struck off, and
I went into court. I got a brief, dignified, orderly trial. The train
conductor appeared and identified me and the fatal twenty-dollar bill I
gave him. All the other witnesses testified, word for word, as they did
at my examination. I removed any doubts there might have been as to my
guilt by declining to go on the witness stand. This trial consumed
almost an hour.

Then I was tried for escaping from Her Majesty’s jail. That consumed
fifteen minutes.

Having no lawyer, the judge asked me if I wanted to go over the points
in the case. I thanked him and said I could not presume to instruct His
Lordship on law points. He gave his verdict then, “Guilty, both
charges.”

“Anything to say before sentence?” he asked.

Thinking he might be feeling better after lunch I asked till one o’clock
to prepare a very short statement. He adjourned court. At one o’clock I
stood up and said: “Your Lordship, my trial was fair; your verdict
just.”

He looked at me a long time. “Two years in the provincial penitentiary
for burglary; six months for jail breaking. Sentences concurrent—and
thirty lashes.”

The prison sentence was no surprise to me. I expected a heavier one. I
had long before admitted to myself its possibility, even its
probability. But I had accepted that as a business man accepts a chance
of bankruptcy, or as a laborer foresees an injury. The court’s order
that I be lashed was a surprise and caused me no small concern. I
couldn’t get it off my mind. I wondered if I could stand it; day and
night I could feel the lash on my bare back. After turning it over in my
mind I decided to make the best of it, and found some consolation in the
thought that if the judge hadn’t ordered the flogging he would have
sentenced me to five or ten years.

I dismissed all thought of escaping again from the jail. Even if I had
my saws that were planted in the cell I got out of, I couldn’t have used
them, for my jailer was determined to land me in the penitentiary and
watched me closer than ever. I was wretched and almost lost hope. I
envied poor dead Smiler and Foot-and-a-half George. I wished myself back
with the larcenous-eyed Tex and his crew of cheap gamblers.  My mind ran
back to Madam Singleton and Julia and the overworked widow at my
boarding house. I thought of the Sanctimonious Kid doing his fifteen
years in a tough “stir” and wondered what had become of Soldier Johnnie,
and how Salt Chunk Mary was faring in far-away Pocatello.

I was the most miserable of them all, and human-like I tried to fix the
blame for all my troubles on some one else. I started in with the judge
who sentenced me, then back to the Indian that pointed me out, then to
the lawyer who had me arrested, and on back and back and through it all
till I got to my father.  The Sanctimonious Kid, who was something of a
philosopher, said to me once: “Kid, ours is a crooked business, but we
must not allow ourselves to think crooked. We’ve got to think straight,
clearly and logically, or we are lost. Of course we’ll lose anyway,
sooner or later, but let us not hasten the day by loose and careless
thinking.”

His advice had not been altogether wasted on me.  I got into the habit
of thinking things over carefully.  The trouble was I didn’t always
follow out my conclusions. I knew I was taking a chance staying in
Canada after my escape; yet I stayed. I had long realized that my every
act was wrong and criminal; yet I never thought of changing my ways.
After thinking it all over with all the clarity and logic and fairness I
could command, I was convinced that nobody but myself was to blame, and
that I had just drifted along from one thing to another until I was on
the rocks. I hadn’t been forced into this life, and this predicament, by
any set of circumstances or any power beyond my control. I had traveled
along this road largely of my own free will, and it followed that I
could get on the right road any time I willed it.

Strangely enough, I didn’t will to do it then and there. It seemed
enough to know and feel I could do it if I wanted to. No use making
resolutions until my sentence of two years was in. I would wait and see
what that brought forth.

The same train that I was arrested on, in charge of the conductor I gave
the bill to, carried me to the prison at New Westminster. My Scotch
jailer loaded me with irons and handcuffed me to a seat to make sure of
me and he delivered me safely. At the town of New Westminster I looked
about me with interest; it was my birthplace. My parents were married in
the United States, but spent the first year of their married life in
British Columbia, where my father had some small business interests. He
was a British subject and never took the trouble to become an American.
That left me a subject of Great Britain, which I still am.

Like ninety per cent of the men arrested for felonies I had given a
fictitious name and birthplace. My jailer called me a “damned Yank”
because I registered at his jail as an American. At the prison a more
complete biographical sketch was demanded of me, with the result that
just so much more fiction found its way into the prison statistics. I
was bathed, shaved, uniformed, measured, weighed, photographed,
questioned at great length, and at last put in a cell by myself.  I was
notified that I would get fifteen lashes next day and that the remainder
would be “laid on” one week before my sentence expired. I was further
told very distinctly that by good conduct I could greatly soften the
severity of the last installment, but that the first would be
administered as the law provided.

Prisoners passing my cell looked in. Some gave me glances of sympathy,
others grinned. One, a big, tough-looking gorilla, out of the British
Navy, stopped and taunted me gleefully. “Oh, aye, Yank, I reckon an’
calculate as ’ow you’ll get a fawncy tampin’ in the mornin’.” I abused
both him and his native language.

The convict librarian came along with his catalogue.  I selected a book
and he got it for me immediately.

My cell was furnished with an iron bed, a small table, a bookshelf, a
three-legged wooden stool, and a galvanized iron bucket. On the bed,
folded, were a heavy, clean pair of blankets and two sheets. On top of
the folded blankets was a straw pillow in a clean slip. Later on a
trusty brought me a gallon bucket of water, a tin cup, a small wooden
vessel to wash in, and a clean towel. Every movable article in the cell
had my prison number on it, and I kept them till the day of my
discharge. On the wall was a card of “Rules and Regulations for the
Guidance of Prisoners.” My first act was to read the rules. This was
prompted by curiosity to learn just what I was up against, rather than a
desire to learn and obey.

I sat on my stool and tried to read, but my mind was on the morning.
Every hour of the long night I woke up with the sting of the lash on my
back.

In the morning, after the prisoners had gone to their tasks, a guard
came and took me to a room in another part of the building where we
found the prison physician waiting. He examined me, pronounced me “fit,”
and told me to take off my shirt. The room was bare, except for a bench
along one wall, and an arrangement in the center of the room that
resembled a photographer’s tripod, only it was higher and stronger. Its
three legs were secured to the floor.

A short, thick man in uniform, with a bristly brown beard and cold blue
eyes, came in with a strap very much like a barber’s strop, except it
was longer and heavier and had a different handhold. He sat on the
bench, eyeing me speculatively. The deputy warden now appeared and gave
an order. The physician sat down beside the man with the strap. Two
guards led me to the triangle. My wrists were strapped to the top of the
tripod where the three pieces joined and my ankles lashed to the
tripod’s legs, leaving me with my arms up in the air and my legs far
apart, helpless as any sheep in the shambles.

“Now, Mr. Burr,” said the deputy warden.

The man with the strap got up off the bench and stepped behind me a
little to my left. Out of the tail of my eye I saw him “winding up” like
a ball pitcher. Then came the “woosh” of his strap as it cut the air.

It would not be fair to the reader for me to attempt a detailed
description of this flogging. In writing these chronicles I have tried
to be fair, reasonable, and rational, and rather than chance misleading
anybody by overstating the case I will touch only the high points and
leave out the details. No hangman can describe an execution where he has
officiated. The best he can do is to describe his end of it, and you
have but a one-sided case. The man at a whipping post or tripod can’t
relate all the details of his beating fully and fairly. He can’t see
what’s going on behind him, and that’s where most of the goings-on are.
Furthermore, he does not approach the subject with that impersonal,
detached mental attitude so necessary to correct observing and
reporting. Mentally he is out of focus, and his perspective is blurred.

If I could go away to some lonely, desolate spot and concentrate deeply
enough I might manage to put myself in the flogging master’s place and
make a better job of reporting the matter. But that would entail a
mental strain I hesitate to accept, and I doubt if the result would
justify the effort.

All along I had my mind made up to take my “tampin’” in as manly a way
as possible and to bite my tongue rather than cry out. Also I had tried
to hypnotize myself up to a pitch where I could bow my back out toward
the blows and hold it there till the thing was done. The first blow was
like a bolt of lightning; it shocked and burned. Looking back at it now,
it seems to me I jumped six feet in the air.  But I couldn’t have jumped
an inch, I was too securely trussed up. I got through it without
squawking, but fell down sadly on the business of bowing my back out.
With each succeeding blow I shrank farther away from the blistering lash
and when it was all over my back was concaved, my chest was bowed out,
and I was trembling like a helpless calf under the hot branding iron.

It made no difference how I wriggled and squirmed, I got the full force
and effect of every blow, and each one fell on a different spot. “Mr.
Burr,” God bless him! served his apprenticeship as a flogging master in
the British Navy, and he knew his little book.

I was untied and stood there a little bit weak in the knees. My back was
blistered, but the skin was not broken. The doctor took a look at it and
went away. One of the guards threw my shirt over my shoulders and,
holding it on with one hand, and my trousers up with the other, I was
marched out and up a flight of stairs to the prison dispensary. The man
in charge was dentist, apothecary, hospital steward, nurse and guard. He
was a big, brawny, muscular Irishman with arms like an iceman’s. While
he was applying a liquid to my back, probably to prevent infection, I
asked him what it was he was using. “You will speak when you’re spoken
to,” he growled severely with a brogue that was triple X positive. He
fixed my back in silence and locked me in a cell in the hospital.

It was a year before I spoke to him again and I waited till he spoke to
me first then. Going into his place one day I found him tugging at a
Chinaman’s tooth. After he got it out and sent the patient away he came
over to see what I wanted. He was puffing and perspiring, and, feeling
rather pleased with his job on the tooth, wanted to talk to somebody.
“Man,” he said, “that was an awful tooth in that Chinaman.  Sure I
thought the jaw was comin’ off of him.”

“Yes?” I inquired. “Was it a molar?”

“No, man, ’twas no molar; ’twas a back tooth.”

He was our prison dentist. He wasn’t a bad fellow at that. He brought me
a worn volume of Shakespeare and let me take it to my cell. I kept it
for months and read it all, and often wondered while reading it what
would have happened to the British Empire if the spirited Will
Shakespeare had been flogged when he stole Mr. Lucey’s venison.

I’ve heard a lot about the humiliation and degradation of flogging. If
anybody was humbled and degraded in my case it was not I. It may sound
strange when I say I am glad now, and was glad then, that they lashed
me. It did me good. Not in the way it was intended to, of course, but in
a better way. I went away from the tripod with fresh confidence, with my
head up, with a clear eye and mind, and sustained with a thought from
the German, Nietzsche, “What does not kill me strengthens me.”

After three days I was returned to my cell and assigned to work on the
farm gang. Mr. Burr, the flogging master, who turned out to be a very
chatty Scotchman, came to my cell door the first night to have a talk
with me, “so there would be no misunderstanding or hard feelings.” I
don’t think he was afraid I would try to do him violence; he just came
in a straight, manly way to explain the thing and his part in it. I
didn’t gather from his talk whether he was in favor of lashing or
against it. He appeared an intelligent, fair-minded man.

“You’ll find me bark is worse than me bite,” he said when he was
leaving. I had already made up my mind I ought to hate somebody over the
flogging and had about settled on Mr. Burr. But when he was gone I
thought it all over again and saw there was no more sense in hating him
than any machine I had carelessly got my fingers into.

I settled down to my work and had a chance to look about me. The prison,
a stone building, was on the finest site in New Westminster, a gently
sloping eminence overlooking a broad sweep of the Fraser River where it
widens to its delta. The prison contained one hundred single cells and
the silent system obtained.  There was never any overcrowding or
haphazard makeshifts. When the cells were all filled, a batch of
prisoners was at once shipped away to the eastern prisons at Kingston,
Ontario, or Stony Mountain, Manitoba, to make room for newcomers. We
were closely watched and guarded by the officers, who were nearly all
ex-army and navy men, iron disciplinarians and sticklers for the
enforcement of rules. I looked about for some way out of the place, but
it seemed hopeless and I gave it up, settling down to do my time.

The prison population came from the four corners of the earth. Sailors
and ex-soldiers, deserters from the navy, a few “Yanks,” fugitives from
the “American side,” Indians from the Arctic Circle brought down by the
Mounted Police to do time for violating laws they never could
understand, and a sprinkling of Chinamen and Japs. The sixty acres of
prison land were farmed intensively, yielding an abundance of fine
vegetables, hay, and grain. Clothing, shoes, and socks were made by
prisoners. The food was coarse but wholesome. An American prison
commissary would not believe a penitentiary could be run without beans.
In my two years at this prison I did not see a bean.  An English prison
warden would not believe a prison could exist without peas. I never saw
a pea in an American prison. I never saw a cup of coffee in the place.
We had pea “coffee” twice a day. It was made from peas grown on the
farm, threshed out on the barn floors with flails, roasted and ground
like coffee. It was very nutritious and not at all unpalatable. We had
plenty of vegetables, mush and pea soup, lots of bread, not too fresh,
and not much meat.  The food ration, even to the salt and pepper that
seasoned it, was regulated by law. Every prisoner got just what the law
allowed him and no more. We always had good appetites, never quite had
them satisfied, had no smoking tobacco, no coffee, very little meat, and
plenty of sleep—the hospital was always empty and there was not a death
in the prison in my two years’ time there.

The place was clean and well ventilated. We had coarse, warm clothing,
enough blankets, plenty of light, lots of good books, and nothing to
distract us when reading. I never saw a bug, flea, or mosquito while
there. The guards were not brutal or overbearing. I never saw one strike
a prisoner; I never saw a prisoner strike a guard.

One morning I glimpsed a familiar face and figure; it was Soldier
Johnnie. I forgot the rules, and sang out, “How long are you doing?”
Before he could answer I was snatched out of the line and locked in my
cell.

The warden was a hardened man, old, sick, and cynical. His motto was
“Break them first and make them over.” The guard submitted a written
report of my misconduct, talking. My punishment was three days on bread
and water. The prison had no dungeon. The prisoner under punishment was
kept in his cell, which was stripped of its furniture and darkened by
placing a blank, wooden, movable door against the outer side of the cell
door proper.

In my dark cell I thought of Soldier Johnnie, and wondered if he
remembered how they bored a hole and fed me through it in the Utah
prison. All the yeggs and “Johnsons” in Christendom couldn’t have put a
crumb of bread into this dark cell in this backwoods prison—it was
English. In all the time I was there I never had a chance to talk to
Johnnie. He was discharged before me, and we had no chance to compare
notes for years.

My cell was darkened many times and I lived many days on bread and water
before I got my time in. I came to learn that a satisfying meal may be
made of two ounces of stale bread if it is eaten slowly and chewed
thoroughly. I was chewing my ration of bread two hours, taking small
bits and chewing them to liquid in my dark cell years before I heard of
Fletcher and his system of Fletcherizing food. My experience with short
rations in many places has convinced me that we would all be healthier
and better nourished if we ate half as much food and chewed it twice as
long.

I soon got into a feud with the officers and guards.  I talked and
laughed and whistled and sang; all of which outraged the ironbound
system of silence. The Fourth of July came along, and as I was
registered as an American I refused to work on that glorious day.  This
was a very serious offense, and I was sentenced to twelve days bread and
water. They opened my cell every fourth day, put in the furniture, and
fed me the regular prison fare. No prisoner may be kept on bread and
water for more than three consecutive days.  That’s English, also.

When the Queen’s birthday, the big holiday, came around, I wrote a note
to the warden asking permission to work; twelve days more, in four
installments.

I read about hay fever in the encyclopedia, and when haying time came I
refused to make hay on the grounds that I was a hay-fever addict. The
doctor disagreed, and my cell was darkened again. When I was sentenced
there was a law under which all prisoners got a plug of “black strap”
chewing tobacco every week. While I was in prison the law was repealed.
Newcomers got no tobacco, but those sentenced while the law was in
force, even if they were life-timers, continued to draw their ration
every week.  A rule was posted forbidding a prisoner who drew tobacco to
give a chew of it to one who didn’t. That’s English, too. I was caught
throwing a chew to a chap that arrived too late, and got another dose of
bread and water.

At last I tired of bread and water, got on my good behavior, and took to
reading. The prison had a splendid library, not a worthless book in it.
All the best English authors were there and I went through them
hungrily. I became so immersed in reading that I was careful not to
break the rules lest I lose three days or more from the books. I got
schoolbooks and studied them. Remembering my poor arithmetic, I tried
mathematics but couldn’t get anywhere. Then the grammar, but the rules
seemed to have been made for no other purpose than to confuse the
beginner and “repress his noble rage,” so I gave that up, got intensely
interested in a small dictionary, and almost went into the dark cell for
carrying it out with me to work and looking into it when the guard’s
back was turned. I read the best books in the library, except the Bible,
and would have taken that only I already had six months with it in the
Scotchman’s jail.

I went through *Chambers’s Encyclopedia* from A to Z. Read all about
acids and paper, metals and metallurgy, dies and molds. I studied the
history of locks and lockmaking, poring over the pictures of locks and
their escutcheons—all kinds of locks and keys, door locks, padlocks,
combination locks, nothing was neglected. I read a most interesting
paper on picklocks and lock-picking by a famous lock-maker of London. I
followed the history of explosives from gunpowder down to nitroglycerin.
I found a passage that told clearly and concisely which explosives did
the greatest damage and made the least noise. What a mine of
information! I was fascinated. I studied guns and pistols, drills and
saws and files, braces and bits and drilling machines of high and low
pressure and fast or slow motion.

I investigated poisons, herbs, and drugs. I discovered that the finest
quality of morphine may be obtained from lettuce and proved it in the
prison garden by extracting it and eating it. I read up on sleeping and
dreaming and learned just what kind of noise is most apt to wake a
sleeping person; just when he sleeps the deepest and at what hour of the
night his courage is at its lowest ebb. I can sit in a hotel lobby
to-day and pick out the sound sleeper, the medium sleeper, and light
sleeper. I got it out of the encyclopedia, and proved it in practice
later.

The time flew by. I read away the long evenings, Sundays, holidays, and
rainy days. We ate in our cells and I always had a book propped up
behind my pan of pea soup. My feud with guards was forgotten.  I had no
trouble with fellow prisoners; the silent system and single cells
prohibited that. There was no whispering, plotting, scheming, and
snitching as there is where the congregate system prevails. The stool
pigeon, so fostered and encouraged in American prisons, did not flourish
there. The silence obliterated him, made him unnecessary.

There was a little cloud on my mind that began to grow. My time was
getting short, some of my credits had been forfeited, and not being able
to find out how much, I was uncertain about the day of my discharge and
expected to be called out any time for the last installment of my
lashing. This made me very nervous, restless, and irritable. The books
no longer held me.




CHAPTER XIX


At last I was sent for by the prison tailor to be fitted into a
discharge suit, and knew that I hadn’t more than a week or ten days to
do. A day or two later the same guards took me to the same room, where I
found the doctor, the deputy warden, the flogging master, and the
triangle all ready for me. I saw I was in for it. The atmosphere was a
little more “official” than on the former occasion. Mr. Burr’s beard
bristled more, and his eye was a little harder.  The doctor looked me
over with more interest. The guards turned their eyes away from mine
as they trussed me up to the tripod, and the deputy warden’s “Now, Mr.
Burr,” was ominously soft, smooth, oily.

The lashing is regulated by law as is every other detail of British
penology. The strap is just so long, so wide, so thick, and so heavy.
The flogging master can swing it just so far and no farther. Mr. Burr
did the best he could with those limitations and reservations, and it
was plenty.

To make an unpleasant story short, I will say he beat me like a balky
horse, and I took it like one—with my ears laid back and my teeth bared.
All the philosophy and logic and clear reasoning I had got out of books
and meditation in my two years were beaten out of me in thirty seconds,
and I went out of that room foolishly hating everything a foot high.  I
had a chance to cool off during the remaining week of my time, and the
day of my release found me halfway rational again.

On my way out of the prison grounds I passed the deputy warden directing
a gang of prisoners. I had nothing against them; I was going out and
feeling good. I waved them a farewell. He turned on me savagely,
snarling, “Be on your way.” I stopped, gave him my best dirty look, and
turned my back on him and his prison forever.

I was in perfect physical condition; the regular sleep, regular work,
and short ration of food had done that for me. I still had the money the
lawyer at Victoria did not claim on me, the discharge money, and fare to
the town I was sent from; in all enough to last me a month by careful
management. My mind had been so unsettled during the last weeks of my
time in prison that I hadn’t decided where to go or just what I would
do. There was no hurry about anything; it was a fine day; I had my
liberty. I bought some tobacco and papers at a near-by store and lay
down on the warm ground in the green grass under the Indian summer sun
to think it over, take stock, and look to the future.

This would be a good place for me to say that I would have quit stealing
then if the terrible lashing hadn’t embittered me and sent me out
looking for revenge, but that would not be the truth. I don’t know to
this day whether the law contemplates flogging as punishment, as a
deterrent measure, or partly both. As a punishment it’s a success; as a
deterrent it’s a failure; if it’s half and half one offsets the other
and there’s nothing gained. The truth is I wouldn’t have quit, no matter
how I was treated.  The flogging just hardened me more, that’s all. I
found myself somewhat more determined, more confident, and with a
feeling that I would play this game of violence to the finish. I had
taken everything they had in the way of violence and could take it
again. Instead of going away in fear, I found my fears removed. *The
whipping post is a strange place to gather fresh confidence and courage,
yet that’s what it gave me, and in that dark cell I left behind many
fears and misgivings.*

I got up and went my way with the thought that I had got more out of
that prison and its keepers than they got out of me. I think the same
to-day of every prison I went into. There were times when I thought I
got a bit more punishment than was coming to me, but I don’t regret a
minute of it now.  Each of us must be tempered in some fire. Nobody had
more to do with choosing the fire that tempered me than myself, and
instead of finding fault with the fire I give thanks that I had the
metal to take the temper and hold it.

I have hopes that these lines will be read by many convicts and
ex-convicts, and they are nothing if not critical readers. I am not
trying to lay down any “rules and regulations” for their guidance on the
outside, but I want to say this—any prisoner who comes out of prison
saying to himself, “I can’t quit; it’s too late; I’m wrecked and ruined;
every man’s hand’s against me; if I get a job some copper will snitch on
me to my boss, or if that don’t happen the other ‘cons’ will blackmail
me; there’s no use trying, I can’t quit”—any “ex-con” who says that is
sentencing himself to a jolt that the most heartless and hard-boiled
criminal-court judge couldn’t conceive of.

The other “con” who comes out time after time saying to himself
cold-bloodedly and calculatingly, “I won’t quit,” might change his mind
some time and say, “I will quit.” When he wills it, he does it, and no
copper snitches him out of his job. If there is any such animal as the
blackmailing “ex-con” he gives the “will” chap a wide berth.

I now went to Vancouver and took it easy for a week, resting up, reading
papers, and trying to get my bearings. I saw nothing of Chew Chee, the
China boy. He didn’t show up in the prison while I was there, and I have
no doubt he quit stealing while he was all to the good and went on the
square.

Falling in with an outfit of bums and beggars at Vancouver I heard
glowing reports of the prosperous mining towns in the interior of
British Columbia and decided to visit them. A week’s journey over the
Canadian Pacific Railway and down the Columbia River found me in the
Kootenai mining district.  Everything I touched turned to money. The
sudden change from no liberty at all in prison to all the liberty in the
world almost wrecked me. I didn’t think of saving the money so
dangerously earned, but squandered it drinking, gambling, and making
many trips across the line into the states where there were more
opportunities for spending and dissipating.

At last a very valuable parcel of stones found its way into my hands. It
was suicide to try to dispose of them on the Canadian side, and I bought
a ticket to Pocatello and Salt Chunk Mary. I had been away from there
almost four years, and had no fear that the town whittler would remember
me, even if he was still on the job, and besides I was hungry for a look
at Mary and for a feed of her beans and salt pork.

Arriving at Pocatello I hastened to her place. There was no change in
its appearance except that it looked more forlorn and weather-beaten by
reason of its contrast with the new buildings that had sprung up around
it. In answer to my confident knock on the door a very genteel and
refined colored woman opened it and asked me to step in. She looked at
me strangely when I asked for Mary. “Why, Miss Mary Howard went away
more than three years ago. She sold me the place for almost nothing,
settled her affairs, and disappeared. Nobody in Pocatello knows why she
left or where she went.”

I inquired at the bank, but they knew no more about her than the colored
lady. I asked no more questions, but got the first train out for Butte,
Montana, where I disposed of my stones and made the bums’ hangouts
determined to find out the whys and wherefores of Mary’s disappearance.
I remembered the night she crushed the calaboose for me, and if trouble
had come to her I wanted to shoulder my end of it.

The bums all knew of Mary’s disappearance, but none of them would even
make a guess as to what became of her. Almost ready to give up, I met
one of the oldest and best informed bums on the road. His “monoger” (a
corruption of monogram), “Hannibal,” was carved on every water tank
between the two Portlands. I made his acquaintance in the Utah
penitentiary, and had met him later on the road. He knew my connection
with Foot-and-a-half George, but did not know I was with him when he was
killed. I had not seen Hannibal since George’s death, and naturally the
talk turned to it.

The burglary was long since outlawed, there was no need for me to
conceal my part in it, so I told him all about the caper. He listened
very attentively, and when I was done said: “You must have been there,
for that tallies exactly with what I heard. Over three years ago I met a
bum by the name of ‘Rochester Red’ at ‘Stew Junction’ (Puyallup,
Washington). Red was five miles outside of that county seat the night
you and George got that box. This is what he tells me.

“He’s just finished a long stretch in the stir at Canon City. His health
ain’t none too good, so he jumps over into Utah and down on the
‘poultice route,’ where he won’t be pestered by bulls while he’s
recuperatin’ on good fresh air an’ green vegetables an’ plenty of bread
and milk. He flops in a haystack five miles out of the town where you
people cut the caper. At daylight the next morning the hoosiers drag him
out and he thinks they’re goin’ to lynch him.  They take him into the
town an’ give him a look at the stiff laid out on the courthouse floor.
He raps to George, an’ just as you say, he is almost cut in half by the
two shotgun loads. Red don’t see any use in givin’ himself a bawl-out by
identifyin’ any dead burglars, so he dummies up on the natives an’ in a
couple of days they let him go, an’ he keeps on goin’, for they are
proper hostile. When Roch’ Red tells me this, I dash into Portland and
out over the Short Line into Pocatello, an’ tells Mary.”

“What was all your hurry about?” I asked.

“Hah,” Hannibal replied. “That’s somethin’ Red didn’t know, an’
somethin’ you don’t know. But you’re all right, an’ I don’t mind tellin’
you.

“George and Mary was raised in my home town, Hannibal, Missouri, an’
George was her brother. They was a mysterious pair, an’ there’s no use
tryin’ to figure what become of Mary.”

When my breath came back, I said: “Well, that explains to me why George
‘sprayed’ Gold Tooth with all that lead at Pocatello.”

“Oh, yes. Tell me about that, Blacky. I never got the straight of it.”

In return for Hannibal’s tale, I ordered a fresh bottle, and over it
told him the story of Gold Tooth’s death at the hands of Foot-and-a-half
George.

Unable to gather any more information about Mary, I turned to work
again, making the towns of Spokane, Portland, Seattle, and Tacoma,
confining myself strictly to house burglary, which is “one man” work.
This kind of thievery is fast becoming a thing of the past. Better
lighting, policing, and locking systems; the apartment house; the
building of “tighter” residences; the better treatment of dogs which
makes them more intelligent; and more efficient and careful servants
have combined to put the old-time house burglar almost out of business.
And that is well, for of all manner of theft it is the most
nerve-racking on both the burglar and the householder.

I never crawled into a window that I didn’t think of Smiler. I never
stepped in or out of a door without thinking of old George. Yet I kept
it up for years, and quit it only because I got tired of playing the
peon for crooked pawnbrokers and getting “fifty fifty” from the
professional “fences.” The fences’ notion of “fifty fifty” is to put a
lead dollar in the Salvation Army tambourine and ask the lassie for
fifty cents change.

In the midst of plenty I found myself starving, and in self-defense
turned to the more direct business of highway robbery. My experience
with house burglary in the small hours of the night left me a nervous
wreck and an opium smoker. Almost every house prowler turns to booze or
drugs. Reader, I’ll ask you if you wouldn’t take a jolt of booze or hop
after an experience such as this?

You are a burglar; you have put in a week “tabbing up” a residence. You
decide to “make” it; it looks all right; no children, you haven’t seen a
dog. The night arrives. You jump into the yard. It’s two o’clock.  You
look the house over. Every door and window fastened, not even an open
coalhole, no porch to go up.  You go back to a kitchen window and
perform a very delicate operation—taking a pane of glass out piece by
piece. Then you put your hand in, release the catch, and raise the
window slowly, noiselessly. You find inside on the windowsill bottles,
boxes, corkscrews, can openers, and a toothbrush. These you pick up, one
at a time, and place outside, below the window.

Now you are in the window, and you find that below, inside, is the
kitchen sink. You get in without disturbing dishes or pans and open the
kitchen door, so you will have a getaway in case anything causes you to
hurry out. You have been almost an hour getting in the house and you
haven’t started on the job yet.

It is very dark in the house, but you light no matches, nor do you use a
flashlight; you are an expert, you know your business. Your years at
this work have developed a “cat” sense in you. You can sense an object
in front of you without seeing or feeling it. You feel your way slowly,
silently into the dining room.  Your eyes are getting accustomed to the
dark and you distinguish a few objects—table, chairs, sideboard. You sit
in a chair and remove your shoes, shoving them down in your back
pockets, heels up.

You are going upstairs where the sleepers and valuables are. You button
your coat and pull your hat down over your eyes to hide your face from
the sleeper should he wake up on you and switch on a light. It takes you
fifteen minutes to get up the stairs; they creak frightfully and you
must find solid places to put your weight. You know your business, so
you keep as close to the banister as possible, where the step boards are
nailed down tight and can’t shift and creak. You know the creaking won’t
wake sleeping people, but you don’t know yet whether they are asleep.
If they should be lying in bed awake, they would know what the creaking
meant and you might get shot.

Now you are at a bedroom door, it’s latched but not locked. You take
hold of the doorknob in a certain way and turn it slowly till it won’t
turn any farther. The hall you are in is dark and dead silent.  You push
the door open an inch and you can hear the gentle, regular up-and-down
breathing of the healthy sleeper. You wait a long time, maybe five
minutes, with your hand on the doorknob, listening intently.  Yes, there
are two sleepers in the room.

Then out of this awful silence comes a coughing from a room at the back
of the hall. You stiffen and your hand goes to your coat pocket. You
hear a glass clink against a pitcher, and you know that man is awake.
You hear him turn over in bed, and straighten out for another sleep. You
remain rigid for another five minutes and then feel your way down the
dark hall to make sure he has gone back to sleep.

His door is ajar, and now he is snoring. You wish he wouldn’t snore; he
might wake somebody else, he might wake himself. Snorers do wake
themselves.  The expert burglar doesn’t fancy the heavy snorer; he likes
the sleeper that wheezes gently, softly, regularly.  You feel your way
back to the front room. You want that first. That’s where you have
decided the best stuff is to be found. Your hand is on the doorknob
again, and you open the door another inch, slowly, noiselessly.

Now something soft, yielding, obstructs it.

This thing that softly blocks the door is probably a rug or an article
of clothing. That’s easy. You release the doorknob, stoop slowly, and
put your hand around inside. Yes, it’s a rug, a fur rug. You nip a few
strands of hair in your fingers and tug at it gently. The thing comes to
life with a scared howl that turns your blood to ice water. You jump up,
pull the door shut with a bang, and hasten to the top of the stairs with
sure and certain step. It took you fifteen minutes to ascend that
stairway. You know every inch of it. You straddle the banister and slide
down—it’s quicker and safer. In the dining room you slam the door shut,
and none too soon. The man upstairs has released the big mastiff and
he’s roaring at the dining-room door. You made no mistake when you left
the kitchen door open. You dash through it, pulling it shut behind you
just as the man inside opens the dining-room door for his dog.

You take the back fence, tearing your clothes. The big dog is in the
back yard now; you hear his ferocious growls plainer than ever. You run
into a vacant lot, toward the next street. You hear the master urging
his dog to follow you, but he is too well trained and refuses to leave
his own yard.

The householder is a regular man; not to be balked of his burglar he
opens up with a six-shooter and empties it at you. After the first shot
you instinctively begin making side jumps like a bucking broncho. You
don’t make as much distance, but you reduce your chance of getting hit.
Every time the gun goes off you can feel the slug boring a hole in your
back. You don’t realize it has already passed you when you hear the
pistol crack. His gun empty, his shooting stops.

You feel like throwing a few slugs in his direction; but, well, you are
in the wrong. You are safe now, it would only make matters worse if you
hit him, and besides, he and his pistol and his dog have made enough
noise already to rouse the neighborhood and you’re lucky if you can get
out of the block without bumping into Mr. “John Law.”

You make a big detour and get downtown safely, so exhausted from the
intense physical and mental concentration that you are barely able to
drag one foot after the other. Yes, reader, I’ll admit you might go to
your room and to bed and drift off into sweet, refreshing slumbers; but
I never could do it.  I always had to hunt up a hop joint and roll
myself a few pills, “just for the good of my nerves.”

You are still a burglar, reader. You get up the next evening, put on a
different suit and hat, and go out for your “breakfast.” You dismiss
from your mind the incident of last night as lightly as a gambler would
forget the loss of a few dollars. You remember the dog that recognized
you in the hotel barroom years before, and with the thought that it
would be well to keep out of this mastiff’s neighborhood you turn your
mind to the business of the night. You take a long time to eat, looking
through all the papers. You read about a burglar “shivering somewhere in
his lair after escaping in a panic of fear from Mr. ——— and his mastiff
and pistol.”

This makes you mad. You say to yourself: “What do those reporters expect
of a man? Do they want him to shoot everybody in sight, cut the dog’s
throat, carry out everything valuable, and burn the house down? Can’t
they understand that the burglar’s first thought is the loot and his
second thought is to get out of the house as quietly and quickly as
possible without harming people when they wake up on him?  And what
madness for the householder to try to corner a burglar in the dark,
prepared to resist capture but not to kill for loot. When he senses a
burglar in his house, why can’t he say in a loud voice, ‘Is that you,
Percy?’ and give him a chance to fade away quietly? He’ll do it. He
knows there are plenty of other houses.”

You give it up, put these idle speculations out of your mind, and go out
into the street. You have been busy locating “prospects.” Your thoughts
turn to the most likely one. There’s the gambler that runs the poker
games in back of the cigar store. He turns the game over to an assistant
at twelve o’clock, takes the bankroll, and goes home. You decide to
“take him home” to-night. You hang around till he comes out and get in
behind him. You “tail” him to a genteel-looking place with a “private
board” sign in a downstairs window. He lets himself in with a key. You
are across the street; you wait a while and observe that a dark room on
the second floor has been lighted.  Your man is at the window pulling
down its shade.  You have his room located, and you go away to kill the
next two hours.

Two o’clock; you are in the dining room downstairs.  You were lucky
enough to find an open window. You don’t open any doors here, you decide
to retreat by the window, if necessary. This is a boarding house with a
number of people in it, and you don’t have to creep around so carefully.
A noise on the stairs or in the hall of a boarding house doesn’t mean
much.

You go upstairs quickly and find a light in the hall.  You put it out;
not by pushing the button, but by unscrewing the globe a little. You are
an expert; you don’t want any light; you don’t want any one to get a
look at you in a lighted hallway. You prefer darkened rooms, because in
the dark you have the best of the situation.

You find his door; more luck, it’s not locked! You must be careful with
this chap; he is a bad sleeper, thin, nervous, “touchy,” an incessant
smoker and a heavy coffee drinker. You step into the room and close the
door but don’t latch it. He is asleep, breathing, as you expected, very
softly. His clothes are on a big rocker—nothing in them but some silver
and a watch. You take the silver, “heft” the watch and leave it; it’s
not solid. You’re disappointed, the roll of bills should have been in
his trousers’ pocket. You feel on the table by the head of his bed; it’s
not there.  On the dresser; not there. Oh, well, you’ll have to go under
his pillow after it, that’s all. This operation calls for your best
professional touch; your perfect technique is needed here; he’s a light
sleeper.

You are on one knee beside his pillow. You lay a gun on the floor within
easy reach. If he wakes up on you that’s his bad luck; you’ll stick him
up, take his money, and lock him in his room. He is lying on his side
facing you and not eighteen inches away.  You can feel his breath
against your face. You pull up your right coat and shirt sleeves to the
elbow, your left hand lifts the outer end of the pillow ever so little
while your right, palm down, slowly, carefully, worms its way beneath
his head. Your ear notes his breathing. So long as it is regular, he
is asleep; if it breaks off he is waking up. While he sleeps he has no
more control over his breathing than over his heartbeats, and you can
plainly hear it, and when you cannot hear it you know he is awake.
With your ear alert for the danger signal and your hand under his
pillow your mind is racing all over the universe.

“No wonder,” you think, “they hang men in some parts of the world for
this kind of burglary—going into a man’s sleeping room with a gun and
taking his property from under his head while he sleeps. No wonder your
hair is graying above your ears, and wrinkles showing up in your
forehead.”

You make up your mind to quit this racket—it’s too tough—but your hand
goes further under the pillow. Careful as you are, the slight movement
beneath his head seems to disturb this catlike sleeper. His breathing
catches, halts, and no longer reaches your ear. You become petrified,
your mind on the gun beside you. With a jerky movement he turns over,
and you wait till he goes sound asleep again.

His back is to you now, and his head on the farther end of his pillow.
This makes it easier. You explore and explore, but feel nothing. Slowly
you withdraw your arm. You must look farther; in his shoes, his hat, the
dresser drawers, the clothes closet, and, that failing, you will put the
gun on him, wake him, and make him dig it up. You have been there almost
two hours. It will soon be dawn; you must hurry.  You search everywhere,
but no bankroll. You go around the bed and your arm is quickly thrust
under the other pillow in the last hope of finding it. It’s not there;
no use looking farther. You decide to wake him and demand it.

Having made up your mind to stick him up, you must now transform
yourself from the silent, stealthy prowler into the rough, confident,
dominating stick-up man. You walk around to the back of the bed and stop
to plan your new move. Now you have it all straight in your mind. You
will go to the side of his bed where you first started in on him. That
puts you between him and the door and leaves him no chance to get out
into the hall. You will touch him gently on the shoulder. He will wake
up in alarm.

“Eh, what? What is it? Who is it? Turn on the light.”

Then you will say to him in a firm, kindly tone: “Listen to me and don’t
get excited.” You will put the cold muzzle of the gun against his neck
and now your voice will be cold, hard, threatening. “Do you feel that?
That’s a gun. If you move I’ll let it go.  You just keep cool and don’t
get yourself killed over a few lousy dollars. I want that bankroll of
yours; I know it’s here. Tell me where it is and make it easy on
yourself—and be quick about it.”

Yes, that’s the way you will handle him. You start on around to the side
of his bed. You remember you have been in the room almost two hours and
a half.  It will soon be daylight. You look at the window.  Yes, there
it is; a faint line of gray down the edge of the curtain, the dawn. You
must hurry. You are by his side now. You take a better grip on the gun,
reach out to touch him, and—pandemonium breaks out in the adjoining
room.

It’s only an alarm clock going off, but it petrifies you standing up and
tears every nerve in your body up by the roots. You don’t bolt out of
the room in a panic; you remain perfectly still. Your mind jumps into
the other room. Your sleeping gambler kicks out his legs, turns over
with a jerky movement, mutters a string of curses, pulls the covers over
his head, and settles himself for more sleep.

You don’t pay much attention to him now. The next room concerns you
more. The noise of the alarm clock changes to a dull, empty, hollow
protest.  You know somebody has his hand on the bell, smothering it till
he can turn it off. Now it stops. You hear somebody lumbering about,
every step shakes the floor.  He must be a big, heavy man who puts his
heels down first when he walks. You hear him push a button and a
vertical crack of light appears at the head of the bed you are standing
by. You know what that is. This is an old house, and that’s a folding
door.

The man now unlocks his door and steps out into the hall. You step
softly to your door and listen.  He goes heavily down the hall,
muttering to himself.  You hear him push the light button a couple of
times but he gets no light—you unscrewed the globe; he thinks it’s burnt
out. You hear him open and shut a door; he is in the bathroom. You turn
back to your man. Then a window is thrown up with a bang in the room on
your other side. Daylight is racing on you. You can see clearly now. You
hear other noises.  The place is becoming a hornet’s nest. You must give
it up and get out. You’re not broke. You don’t have to risk everything
here. You step out of the room, close the door softly, go downstairs,
and out the front way.

Yes, reader, you went down the street and into a restaurant where you
ate heartily. Then to bed for a good, healthy, sound sleep.

Not me! I went back to the hop joint.

You get up the next evening, go to the same restaurant, get something to
eat, and look over the papers. You find nothing about your doings; you
didn’t expect to. You know the gambler missed his silver.  You know he
will suspect somebody around the boarding house and lock his room door
in future. You take stock and decide to lay off for a few nights and
give your luck a chance to switch.

You are slowly making up your mind to get out of this burglary racket;
it’s too tough. Suppose you had stuck up the gambler. Maybe his money
was downstairs in a safe and you wouldn’t have got it.  You would have
had to dash out into the street whether you got it or not. How could you
tell who would be in the street when you went out? The cop on the beat
might be sitting on the front steps. You might bump into the milk man,
the bread man, or the ice man. You decide that the whole thing is very
uncertain, after all.

For the first time you see clearly this dangerous angle of this business
of yours. You can plan and plot and scheme; you can figure out just what
you’ll do from the minute you step into a place till you step out of it,
but the great weakness of it is—you can’t tell who or what is going to
be outside when you go out, and all your ingenuity can’t overcome it.
You toss the whole thing out of your mind and go to a theater. After
that you go to your room. It’s a warm night, you’re in no hurry about
going to bed, so you sit in the dark by the window getting the cool air.

You wonder who will occupy the transient room directly across the light
well from you. Last night a woman and two children were in it. They
talked all during the forenoon and kept you awake. You hope they have
gone away. Just as you are ready to go to bed a light is switched on in
the room across the way. Idly you look over. The window is open and the
curtain is up. A fat man with a pink complexion and gray hair is
standing in the middle of the room.  His door is still open, you can see
through his room and out into the hall. He stands facing you, his legs
apart, hands in his pockets, and his hat on the back of his head.

You decide he is about half drunk. He takes his hat off and throws it
out of your line of vision, probably at the dresser. Now he turns
around, goes to the door, and kicks it shut with a bang. Back in the
middle of his room he puts a fat hand in his capacious pants pocket and
comes up with a small roll of paper money. He unrolls the bills, looking
at them with a mysterious smile on his fat face. You don’t understand
his smile and wonder if he is thinking how he cheated somebody in a
poker game; he looks like a gambler.

The roll interests you, the outside one is what you call a “salmon
belly.” It is a yellowback—a big bill. The fat man now gets a chair and
places it directly in front of his window, but instead of sitting down
he stands up on it unsteadily. You get alarmed and watch him intently.
Surely he’s not going to jump out? No, he takes the string and pulls the
curtain halfway down. All you can see of him now is his bulky
midsection. The upper part of him is silhouetted against the curtain. He
raises one hand above his head, the hand that holds the bills. You can
see its blurred shadow as he runs it along the roller at the top of the
curtain. He takes hold of one edge of the curtain now, pulls it down a
little till the ratchet is released, and lets it go up with a rattle and
bang. He puts both hands on the windowsill to steady himself as he gets
off the chair.

He is still smiling, but there’s no mystery about it now. You sit in
your room not fifteen feet away, open-mouthed in amazed admiration. What
a fox he is, to roll his money up in the curtain! What a plant! What
chance would a prowler have of finding his money?

He sits down with his back to you and you hear him drop one shoe on the
floor; in about a minute you hear the other one drop. Then he goes over
to the door, turns the key, and snaps the light out. In fifteen minutes
you can hear him breathing like a blacksmith’s bellows.

He is healthy, he is a good eater and drinker, he is a sound sleeper.
But the thing looks suspiciously soft to you and you wonder if the fat
man might not be a smart dick framing for you. You decide he isn’t
because he locked his door.

“Well,” you say to yourself, “bad luck or good luck, I’m going after
that dough.”

You don’t mind his door being locked. You know your business; you have
three ways of opening it.  You go out and down the hall to a small room
where the Chinese bed maker keeps his brooms, buckets, mops, and other
things, and get a small parcel of delicate instruments you keep planted
there. You go back to your room and wait till, say, four o’clock, when
everything is dead and all the guests are in and abed.  Then you go
around into the fat man’s hall, put out the light, and go to work on his
door.

You go about the opening of his door confidently, and with a sure touch.
You know he is sleeping, you can hear his gusty breathing from where you
stand outside. Now you have it unlocked, you open it, step in, and close
it. The chair is still in place by the window. Your ear follows his
regular breathing. You don’t creep around this room as you did in the
gambler’s. You walk over to the chair, step upon it lightly, put one
hand up against the roller, and pull the curtain down with the other. It
makes a little noise. Your back is to the sleeper, but your ear tells
you he is safe. When the curtain is about halfway down, your fingers
touch the roll of bills, another little pull and you have it.

You step down off the chair and find his vest and trousers. His watch
“hefts” heavy. You take it, and you take the silver out of his
trousers—just to penalize him for trying to be foxy.

You go out, closing the door carefully behind you.  Back in your room
you examine the bills and silver carefully—you remember the
twenty-dollar bill that cost you two years and two lashings. You find
you have more money than you would have got out of both the places you
failed in; enough to last you six months if you are careful and don’t
gamble.

You plant your instruments in the little room down the hall. Then you go
out the back way to dodge the night clerk, and down to an all-night
saloon where you put the bills away in your compartment in the big safe.
The night bartender is “square”; he knows you and your business. You
want to get rid of the watch as quick as possible. It’s worth a hundred
dollars.  You sell it to him for a twenty-dollar note, glad to be done
with it.

Yes, reader, I know what you say to yourself now.  You are saying:
“Well, he doesn’t have to go to the hop joint this time.”

You are right. I didn’t have to go, but I went just the same. The opium
smoker can always find a good excuse for an extra smoke. I went to the
joint to celebrate my changed fortune and to propitiate whatever
deformed deity it is that is supposed to look after the luck of a
burglar. I must have propitiated to some purpose, for within a week
another stroke of dumb luck more than doubled my bankroll, and I decided
to take a lay-off.

Always in the back of my mind was the thought that some day I would go
back and see my father. It was ten years since I ran away from him. Many
things had happened to me. Something may have happened to him. He might
need money or help. I was free to go; I had no associates to cling to; I
was under no obligations to anybody. My time and money were my own. The
hop habit was getting fastened on me, and this trip would give me a
chance to break away from it. The notion of being respectable and
feeling safe and secure for a few months took my fancy, so I started in
to do the thing right.

My gun and burglar tools went to my bartender friend as presents. I was
glad to get rid of the gun for a while. I could get another any time for
ten dollars, and for another ten I could order by mail more instruments
from an ex-burglar at Warsaw, Illinois, who manufactured them and
advertised them in the *Police Gazette* as “novelties.”

I had always followed the Sanctimonious Kid’s advice in the matter of
wearing careful clothes, but now I satisfied my hankering for a gray
suit and hat.  I thought of the leather trunk too, but it had no appeal
any more. I remembered old Cy Near, and smiled to think how I had
worshiped the twenty-dollar gold piece that dangled from the watch chain
across his ample paunch.

I soon discovered that being respectable imposed many hardships and
obligations I hadn’t thought of.  One of them is paying railroad fare. I
played the game square while I was at it, and gave up my money for a
ticket and a berth in the sleeper. Here I encountered another hardship.
My professional eye told me there were many fat pocketbooks beneath the
pillows of my fellow travelers that my professional hand could have
taken when the porter was out of sight, but I forebore.

At Kansas City I prowled about the neighborhood I had lived and worked
in, but asked no questions. The crabbed, cranky widow’s boarding house
was closed.  Tex of the larcenous eye was gone, and so were the card and
dice sharks. Cocky McAllister, the hack driver that helped me rescue
Julia, was not around his old stand. The milkman I worked for,
collecting bills from “them women,” was not at his place. The theater
where Julia worked was still going, but she was not there. I passed
Madam Singleton’s old place, but there was another name on the
red-lighted pane of glass above the door. Still I asked no questions;
they were all nothing to me. I could easily have found somebody to tell
me what became of them all except, perhaps, Julia, but I was a stranger
in my own town and preferred to remain one. My father was the only one I
asked about. At the railroad offices, in the department where he had
worked, I learned that he was dead.

A talkative old pensioner on the company who tended a door told me he
had been dead three years; that he died after a long siege of sickness
and had barely enough money left to bury him decently in the village
graveyard beside my mother. I was not shocked to learn of his death; we
had been too far apart for that. I wondered if my long silence and
absence mightn’t have aggravated his illness and hastened his end. I was
sorry not to have been with him when he was sick and needed me. I was
glad he died without knowing what I had done to my life.

That was many years ago, but I wasn’t thoughtless even then, and I
recall now, distinctly, how I realized with shame and regret that I had
never done one thing to repay him for caring for me till I was able to
shift, no matter how lamely, for myself. Looking back now, as I did
then, I am forced to admit that the only consideration I ever showed for
him was this: I never put his name, which is my name, on a police
blotter or a prison register while he was alive, or after his death.

I had been dallying with the opium pipe almost daily for a year, yet I
had no trouble when I gave it up—just a few restless days and nights and
I forgot it.  I gave this no thought then, but later when I saw an opium
smoker doubled up with cramps and pleading for hop, and learned he had
been “on the pipe” only three months, I got interested and began
thinking it over and observing.

My observations and experience have convinced me that the drug habit,
like most of our other habits, is largely mental. In another chapter I
shall submit a few facts in support of this opinion.

Kansas City had nothing of interest for me now, and I left it, never to
return. A cheap excursion ticket took me back west to the town of Los
Angeles, where I finished the winter, fraternizing with the bums and
yeggs from the road, polishing up old acquaintances, and gathering
gossip from the four quarters of the underworld.




CHAPTER XX


Spring came. For me that meant moving, and while I was trying to decide
where to go I made by chance the acquaintance of a coal miner who had
worked in a small mine in one of the middle-west provinces of Canada. In
the course of our talks I learned by asking a few casual questions that
the mine worked between thirty and forty men; that it was on a short
branch road off the Canadian Pacific; that the pay-off was in cash, on
or about the first of every month, and that the money was shipped by
express from the city of Winnipeg, Manitoba. The fact that the payroll
had to be held one night at the point where it was transferred to the
branch road into the mine interested me. I knew the place, and that
there was little or no police protection. There were four or five
thousand dollars that had to lie somewhere in a small town overnight,
practically unprotected. The two thousand miles I would have to travel
meant nothing.  If the thing couldn’t be handled, I would still be in
the midst of fertile fields where I could make a living without taking
tough chances against wised-up city police and the busy stool pigeon.

Bidding farewell to the bums and yeggs at “Mother Moustache’s” wine dump
in “Sonora Town,” where they all hung out and did their drinking, I
discarded my gray suit for a pair of overalls, a rough coat, a blue
shirt, and a cap, and took to the road for a three-week jump. Through
California, across Oregon, and into Spokane, Washington, where I found
my bartender friend and recovered my “instruments,” which had been lying
unused in the safe. The gun I left with him, as it was cumbersome and
useless to me on the road. I could get one when I got nearer my
destination.

On through Butte, Great Falls, and to the Canadian line I traveled; on
north to Calgary again, but this time I turned eastward and soon arrived
at the town where the mine payroll had to be transferred.

I had managed my money carefully during the winter and still had enough
to carry me for a few months by economizing. The first thing I did was
to take a look at the “box” in the depot, which was the express office
as well. I had confidently expected to find a safe of cheap or obsolete
make, such as was generally in use then in the smaller towns.

One look at this “box” made me regret that I had ever met the talkative
coal miner. It was of the latest make and belonged in a bank instead of
an express office in a town of two thousand people. It was as near
burglar-proof as any safe could be, and in addition to this it was
“chested,” which, in terms of burglary, means it had a steel chest
inside—a safe within a safe. I was dismayed. I saw at a glance that it
was too much for me. It was the kind of safe that discourages the “heavy
man” (safe breaker). He looks it over and says to his mob: “Yes, I can
beat her all right,” and explains to them in detail just how it can be
done. “But,” he finishes, “it would take three or four shots to get into
the guts of her and, you know, the first shot wakes the natives up. If
they don’t hear another they don’t know what woke them, and go back to
sleep; but when they do hear the second shot they get up to find out
what it’s about. Then comes the last one, and they’re on top of you with
shotguns and pitchforks. You’ve got to stand them off and dash out.
Where? Why, nowhere. There’s no getaway here, and I don’t want the coin
bad enough to go against it.”

I knew if they put the payroll in that “box” it would be as safe from me
as if it was in the bank at Winnipeg. I couldn’t have opened it if I had
it in the town blacksmith shop for twenty-four hours.  Discouraging as
the business looked, I decided to stay in the place and have a look at
the money when it arrived.

I got a room at the hotel, hung my coat up on a rack, and went about in
my shirt sleeves trying to appear like a miner or ranch hand and attract
no attention. Every night at nine o’clock, when the train came in from
the east, I was on the depot platform with the town loungers and did as
much staring around as any of them. At last the end of the month came,
and with it the payroll. This night the station agent, who was telegraph
operator, express agent, and everything else about the depot, was a bit
more alert, walking around with an air of importance, responsibility.
When the train pulled in, he was at the door of the express car, and,
sure enough, out came the payroll in a small leather container, about
the size of a woman’s hand bag.

When the train departed, the agent, with a firm grip on the leather
pouch, returned to his office escorted by the depot loungers. The
payroll was locked securely in the inner compartment of the big safe,
and then the heavy outer door closed upon it, shutting out any hopes I
had of getting my hands on it that night.  I went off to bed sad and
thoughtful.

The next morning at ten o’clock I followed the payroll aboard the
jerkwater train that carried it to the waiting miners. At twelve o’clock
I sat on the sidewalk across from the mine office and gloomily watched
the paymaster portioning it out to the joyful miners.  In the afternoon
I rode back to the main line with my mind made up to let the thing go
and look elsewhere for something not so tough.

There was a Chinese laundry in the town and I had often thought of going
into it for a smoke to kill off the dull hours, and now, both dull and
despondent, I made my way to it and into the confidence of the boss
Chinaman, who made me welcome. He was hospitable and kindly as all
Chinese are who have not become sour and suspicious under the
impositions of their white brothers.

A moderate quantity of opium will not inflame or distort the
imagination. I do not say it is an aid to clear thinking, but it is a
fact that I left the laundry with what I thought, and still think, was
nothing less than an inspiration.

The next day I went over the town thoroughly and looked at every “box”
in it. There was not one that I couldn’t beat. My “inspiration” told me
that if I could put the depot safe out of business a few days before the
payroll arrived again, the agent would be forced to lock it in one of
the other safes in the town and I might get a chance at it. After
traveling the great distance and spending so much time and money, I
hated to quit without making a try for this money.

I jumped fifty miles farther east, where I got dynamite and drills,
stealing them at a mine, and returned to wait another month before I
could do anything more. A week before the payroll was due, I went into
the depot one night with a sledge hammer, knocked the combination knob
off the “box,” battered the spindle in, and smashed the handle on the
door.  Adding another touch to the “burglary,” I left a couple of
crowbars behind, broke open the till, smashed things generally, and
threw cigarette and cigar snipes and pipe scrapings on the floor. When
the station man opened up the next morning, his office looked as if it
had been raided by a tribe of yeggs that had tried to wreck it when they
failed to open the “box.” There was a tremendous hue and cry, and a
fruitless man hunt. An inspector of police came, looked at the safe, and
declared the job was done by a band of thieves that had been ravaging
depots and post offices farther east. The battered safe was shipped to
Toronto to be opened and repaired by its makers.

I waited with much anxiety and not a little curiosity to see what would
be done with the leather pouch when it arrived at the end of the month.

Two days after the safe and express office were wrecked, a “redcoat,” as
the Mounted Police are called, was killed by a drunken Indian. Every
idle able-bodied man in town joined the man hunt that lasted ten days,
and my “burglary” was forgotten in the new excitement. I kept a careful
watch on the depot agent, and saw he was taking the day’s small receipts
home with him every night. I looked over his house and prepared to enter
it in case he did the same with the payroll instead of leaving it in one
of the safes.  My most careful check on his residence showed he had no
children, no dog, no old people in it. He and his wife were all I would
have to contend with.

On the evening the money was due I went over the whole thing carefully
and satisfied myself that nothing had been left undone in the way of
precaution and protection. Not a glance of suspicion had turned in my
direction so far, and I was sure that if I got my hands on the money I
could plant it, stand pat, and weather the storm.

At last the train pulled in. A mail sack was thrown out to a small boy,
who ran off to the post office with it. The leather pouch was put into
the agent’s hands and a few of the “regulars” at the depot followed him
to his office. As usual he at once put out the lights, locked the place
up, and walked across the street to the post office, surrounded by the
depot loungers. The small mail was distributed in five minutes, and he
turned toward home with the payroll under his arm, a neighbor on each
side of him, and I half a block behind.

His neighbors left him at his front gate, and his wife met him at the
front door. I was relieved when the business resolved itself into a
house burglary, for forcing safes with explosives is an uphill job for
one man and is seldom attempted. The house was new, well built, and
small—three rooms downstairs and two above. It was in a large lot with a
few small trees and some plants around it. I took up my watch at once,
and from the vacant lot adjoining I saw them sit down to dinner. After a
half hour at the table, they got up and I could hear them shutting
doors, putting windows down, and fastening them. For a minute the house
was dark, then a light appeared upstairs, which meant they were going to
bed.  Another half hour and the upstairs light was doused.  I walked
away. I had “put them to bed” and could do nothing more till after
midnight.

In the city the burglar finds most people asleep at dawn; in the country
most people wake with the dawn.  I knew I must start early and set one
o’clock as the hour to begin. Allowing myself two hours to get in, get
action, and get out, I could have it over by three o’clock, which would
give me time to plant the money and be in my room before daylight. My
parcel of instruments and a gun were planted a few blocks away.  I went
after them, returned to the house, and found a place in the yard where I
could watch and wait without being seen by any chance passer-by. With
two hours to kill, I went over the thing again and could think of
nothing more in the way of precaution. I had even picked a place in a
lot near by to plant the money.

At one o’clock I took off my shoes and put them in my back pockets.
There in that house was a big piece of money. I had put in almost two
months planning to get it, and now that I was ready to “step” I summoned
everything in the way of professional skill that I had acquired in the
years since the Smiler gave me my first lesson. I found the kitchen door
locked. The key inside was soon displaced and the door unlocked with one
of my own. Once inside I shut the door; this was in the country and I
could not chance stray, hungry dogs or cats coming in for food and
knocking pans around while I was upstairs.  The door to the dining room
was shut, but not locked.  There was a rocking-chair in line between the
front and back dining-room doors. I carefully pushed it to one side,
making the way clear in case of a hasty leaving.

At the foot of the stairs in the hall I could hear the man breathing.
The bedroom door upstairs was open. The stairs were solid, well put
together, and did not creak, but I took a long time in doing them,
wondering all the while where I would find the leather bag. No such luck
as getting it off the dresser. No, he would surely have it under his
pillow. After a long wait at the door of their room my ears picked up
the woman’s gentler breathing. They both slept the sleep of young,
healthy, tired workers, and I could wish for nothing more. There was
light enough from the window to enable me to look over the dresser. The
pouch was not there and I prayed it wouldn’t be in one of the drawers,
for of all the abominable obstacles that balk the burglar of a sleeping
room the bureau drawer is the first and worst.

After wasting the better part of an hour going through the room, I
concluded the thing was under his head. Kneeling beside his pillow, I
put the gun beside me on the floor, ready to my hand, where I could get
it and stick him up if he woke up on me.  The sleeper was lying on his
back. His head was on the middle of his pillow, and directly beneath it
was the leather bag.

A watch or purse may be taken from under a pillow with ease, but an
object the size of this bag I wanted will shift the pillow when it is
withdrawn. It pulls the pillow with it, the pillow pulls the sleeper’s
head with it, and he wakes up. When the burglar gets up against this, he
has to put one hand against the end of the pillow, holding it in place,
while he tugs gently at the spoils below.

Whether it was my pulling on the pouch I don’t know, but the sleeping
man stirred uneasily and his regular breathing stopped. I shrank down
lower beside the bed, one hand under his head and the other at the
pillow, breathless from the intense concentration and suspense. He
stirred again and then floundered heavily over on his side, his back to
me and his head off the leather. I could not hear him breathe. I was
sure he was awake, but not alarmed. After a heart-breaking fifteen
minutes his sleep became natural again, and I slowly, softly pulled the
pouch free from under his pillow. It was mine now, and it was my
business to hold on to it.

I took as long going downstairs as I did going up, and at last made my
way out of the house, closing the kitchen door softly behind me. Putting
my shoes on, I hastened away to plant the money. In the neighborhood was
a big vacant lot, its boundaries marked by a row of broken and leaning
fence posts from which the boards had been taken for firewood or other
uses.  Pulling one of the loose posts from its place, I threw the pouch
in the hole and jammed the post down on top of it. The gun and
instruments I threw into a small stream near by. I wanted to be entirely
clean of anything incriminating in case I was suspected, arrested, and
searched.

In the security of my room I went over the night’s work. After an hour’s
thought I could think of but one more thing I ought to do. My socks
might have picked up dirt or dust around the house. A particle of dust,
a piece of thread or lint or raveling of cloth might convict me if
suspicion fell on me. Taking the socks off my feet, I went out and threw
them in a lot.

Fully satisfied that I had done everything possible to insure safety, I
returned to the hotel. Daylight was coming on. Going upstairs I met the
porter coming down to open up. He gave me a sleepy “good-morning,” and I
went on to my room and to bed, but not to sleep. I was in the dining
room as usual about seven o’clock. The room was noisy, every one was
talking at once. A tall man got up from the table, saying in a loud
Western drawl: “Waal, I’m fer lynchin’ ’em if we git ’em.” A
quiet-spoken Englishman next me at the long table told me all about the
burglary. Out in the street I saw with some concern that the town was on
fire with excitement.

I got through the forenoon all right, standing around the street
discussing the burglary with acquaintances I had made in the town, doing
more listening than talking. At noon, when I went into the hotel for
dinner, the constable, the hotel men, and the porter I met on the stairs
in the early morning were standing at the bar with their heads together
talking earnestly.  When they saw me they quit talking and went out on
the sidewalk. One glance from the constable told me I was suspected. I
saw that the porter had done his deadly work; I was due for a lot of
questioning.  Along in the afternoon the superintendent of the mine
where the payroll belonged got into town and took charge of things.
There was a powwow in the magistrate’s office. I saw the hotel porter go
in, and braced myself to take the blow.

In a few minutes the constable came out and over to me where I stood
with a crowd of natives. “Please step inside, young man,” he said.
Inside a group of men were seated and I was given a chair. I was
determined to answer no questions. No use in going into long, detailed
explanations of my movements and have them exploded and discredited on
investigation, and thus strengthen the case against myself.

The magistrate began on me. “Young man, we want you to explain your
business here. Who you are, where you’re from, and what you do for a
living?  You are suspected as the burglar who last night entered the
express agent’s house and made off with four thousand and eight hundred
dollars cash. You were seen entering your hotel at daylight this
morning. Explain that to us.”

My mind jumped back to the floggings, the dark cells with their bread
and water, to my escape from jail, and to every other hardship I had
accepted without weakening, and I laughed at him. Here was a little,
pompous fat man blustering under his black skullcap behind a cheap table
with a few legal papers on it, trying to make me talk.

I said to him: “Did you ever sleep in my hotel?”

“Yes,” he answered, forgetting his dignity.

“Well, then, you know that the wash room and toilet are in a covered
space between the two wings of the building, outside and at the rear,
and to get to them you go down the back stairs and out a back door.”

“Very well,” he replied, “now tell us why you were at the depot the last
two times the payroll was left off. Why you followed it up to the mine,
and why you followed the agent home last night.”

I brazened it out with all the indignation I could muster, reminding him
that I was a British subject and it was my right to stand mute and
answer no questions.  The mine superintendent said to the others so I
could hear him: “My men want to lynch somebody; I don’t know whether I
can control them.” I knew all about miners and knew they never lynched
anybody anywhere. I knew I was in Canada where lynching never
flourished.

I turned to a group of miners at the back of the room. “This man says
you want to lynch me. Before you do it, I want to know why.”

One of them, a giant, red-headed Irishman with shaggy, white eyebrows
and pebbly blue eyes, said: “Don’t worry, me boy, there’ll be no
lynchin’ here.”

Turning to the magistrate, I said: “You telegraph, at my expense, the
Minister of Justice at Ottawa that this man,” pointing to the
superintendent, “is trying to incite these miners to lynch me. And I
want a copy of the telegram and my request made a matter of record in
your office.”

The magistrate looked confused. The superintendent said, “I’ll make the
complaint. I want this man held.” The constable arrested me “In the
queen’s name,” searched me and locked me in the town jail, a one-room
affair in a lot back of his house. He brought me blankets and supper,
and left me to meditate in silence and privacy. I went over everything
again.  The shoe was on the other foot this time; they hadn’t a thing on
me. No court in Christendom would convict me on those shreds of
suspicion. I rolled up in the blankets and went to sleep with the
comfortable thought that the forty-eight hundred dollars might help me
to forget the awful lashing I took at New Westminster when I got to San
Francisco or Chicago with them.

Next morning in court it was shown by witnesses that I was at the depot
twice when the money arrived; that I went to the mine once on the same
train with it; and a woman testified that she saw me walking behind the
station agent and his neighbors as they went home the night of the
burglary. The porter who spilled the beans finished the trial by
testifying that he met me on the stairs in the early morning; that I was
nervous, acted suspiciously, and tried to avoid him.

I made no defense, but set up a loud and long protest that did no good.
I was held for trial and whisked away to the provincial jail. I was
convinced that the mine superintendent had engineered the thing on the
theory that I was guilty and in hopes that something would transpire in
his favor while I was waiting to be tried.

The provincial jail was like the one I escaped from.  The jailer was
sober and decent, giving me plenty of books and fair treatment. I had a
cell to myself, kept away from the other prisoners, tried my case
mentally every day, and got acquitted every time, and at night I spent
large chunks of the payroll that was so securely planted in the post
hole.

After three months of leisure, reading and pleasant anticipations, I
went to court. A judge had arrived for the fall assizes and mine was the
only felony case.  The witnesses were all there. I pleaded not guilty
and my case was set for trial at two o’clock in the afternoon. The judge
asked if I had counsel. I told him I had no lawyer and didn’t want one;
that I had but little money and would need it when I was acquitted.

“Better get counsel,” he snapped. “A defendant that tries his own case
has a fool for a lawyer.”

I replied by asking him to read the testimony from the lower court
before wasting his time trying me.

While I was eating dinner the mine superintendent came to my cell and
said if I would give up the money I could go free. I threatened to sue
him for false imprisonment when I got out. He went away mad.  I decided
they wanted me to get a local lawyer in hopes I would unbosom myself to
him so he could do the same with them.

At two o’clock I was back in court. The judge was a brusque,
businesslike little old man with the brisk, aggressive air of a terrier.
His hair was clipped short and his cropped beard grew in every
direction.  He wore a coarse suit of tweeds, hobnailed shoes, and a
cheap flannel shirt, with a linen collar and no tie.  He had two sheets
of paper in his hand, looking at them.

“Have you anything more than this?” he asked the Crown counsel.

“Nothing, Your Lordship.”

“And do you expect me to try a man on this ragged rot?” Throwing the
papers on his desk, he turned toward me. “Defendant discharged.”

I walked out and over to the jail, where I got my belongings—forty
dollars, a pocketknife, and a lead pencil. The constable who made the
arrest followed me all over town—to the barber’s, the restaurant, and at
last to the depot. A train came in going in the opposite direction from
the scene of the burglary, and I boarded it without buying a ticket. He
watched the train leave, but did not get on. At a junction I got off and
traveled south to a stage-line connection, where I took the stage back
in the direction of my money.  After ten days of maneuvering and
detouring, I reached a settlement off the railroad about thirty miles
away from where I was arrested.

Hiring a saddle horse there, I jogged away in high spirits, timing
myself to get into the town about midnight, when I could lift the plant
and be far away before daylight. Everything favored me as I rode into
the town. There wasn’t a stray dog or cat on the back streets, and every
soul was in bed asleep.  Turning a corner, I came in sight of the big,
vacant lot. Yes, there it was. My eye took in the row of leaning, rotten
posts down one side and across the front, then to the inner line of the
lot where I put the leather pouch in its post hole. There seemed to be a
change there. Was I at the right lot? Yes, there, a block away, was the
house I entered, plain in the moonlight. My eye followed the route I
took from the house to the lot. I pulled up the tired horse, certain I
was at the right spot; and I was.

But on top of the spot, directly on top of it, stood a long, wide,
well-built, substantial, two-story frame building.

That hour when I saw the money was lost to me was probably the saddest
of my life. I never got a greater shock. I am telling this story because
it is an interesting incident, not to cause anybody misery or mirth. Yet
I know that any thief reading it will groan in sympathy with me. The
honest reader will laugh and say: “It served him right.”

In the last ten years I have learned money-honesty.  I have come to like
it, it has become a habit. I practice it daily. Some day I may learn to
laugh at the loss of that forty-eight hundred, but I’ll never learn to
like laughing over it. It will never become a habit to be practiced
daily.

Slumping off the horse, I threw the bridle rein over his head, left him
standing patiently in the street, and walked stiffly over to the
building. As near as I could judge one corner of it was directly over
the spot where I made my plant. The front and one side of it covered the
line where the decayed fence had formerly marked the boundary of the
lot. Small barred windows in the cement foundation showed there was a
basement and crushed my hopes that the money might be under the
building. A careful survey of the place convinced me that the payroll
was gone and there was no use in hanging around and inviting another
pinch.  Right here I should have muttered a string of oaths, thrown
myself into the saddle, sunk my spurs, rowel deep, into the flanks of my
horse, and dashed madly out of town. Sore from the long ride, I was
barely able to throw a stiff leg over the saddle and settle down in it.
Turning the horse’s head in the direction of his home, I threw the reins
on his neck and let him jog along as he liked. I was crushed. It was an
hour before I could think rationally. Then the question came into my
mind that is in your mind now, reader.  Who got the money?

I wish I could tell you, but I can’t. I don’t know.  I wish I could tell
what became of Julia, the girl from Madam Singleton’s. I wish I could
tell you what was done at the Diamond Palace when the tray of stones was
missed, and whether Chew Chee, the Chinese boy, was recaptured and had
to go to prison.

I can’t answer any of those questions. The nature of my business was
such that I preferred to leave them unanswered rather than bring
disaster by inquiring too closely. I know the mine payroll never got
back into the owner’s hands. I assume it was found by a laborer, who
kept it. The reconstruction of the finding of my money and the picturing
of its finder furnished me with many hours of mental relaxation.  Lying
in the dungeon or in the hop joint or on the grass in the public parks,
I pieced it together painfully.  But never could I see the lucky finder
as an honest man; nor by any effort of imagination could I ever picture
him as putting the money to any good use.  In the end, he always turned
out to be a drunken, dissolute day laborer, sweating in the sun as he
dug out the ditch for the foundation of that building. I saw him turn up
the leather pouch with his shovel, seize it, open it stealthily, and
thrust it inside his shirt.  Then he threw down his shovel, walked over
to the boss, and demanded his “time.”

I heard the foreman say: “All right, you’re no good anyway. I was going
to fire you to-night.”

I followed the finder to the little depot where he bought a ticket to
the wide-open joyful town of Montreal. There I watched him dissipate my
money riotously in the slums. At last, and with great satisfaction, I
saw him dead in the gutter without a dime, and followed his body to the
morgue, where the coroner pronounced it a case of “acute alcoholism.”

After a long tiresome ride I delivered the fagged horse to his owner and
went off to a quiet spot to sum up and see how I stood with the world.
My loss was not put down to poetic justice or attributed to the law of
compensation. I just classified it as a mess of tough luck and tried to
forget it. An inventory of my possessions showed one pocketknife, one
pencil, a bandanna handkerchief, tobacco and papers, and nine dollars. I
was a hundred miles away from any place where I could put my hands on a
dollar without getting arrested at sunrise. I had no gun, no keys, no
instruments. I was a shorn lamb. No one but myself was to blame for the
shearing, and it was up to me to get busy and temper the wind as quickly
as possible.

In the way of clothes I had those I left Los Angeles in—overalls, blue
shirt, a stout coat, and a cheap cap.

After bumming a stage ride, beating my way over a jerkwater branch road,
and stowing away on a Columbia River boat loaded with dynamite and
explosive oil for the mines, I got into one of the prosperous camps with
a lone dollar in my pocket. The town was booming; crowded with miners,
prospectors, and speculators. Beds were two dollars a night and meals a
dollar. This caused me no uneasiness, for I knew it would be easier to
get three dollars there than fifteen cents in the big cities where, in
those days, a “chicken dinner” could be had for a dime and a “flop” on a
bare floor for a “jit,” as the Southern negro affectionately calls his
nickel.

In a restaurant I met an old friend in the person of the waiter, who had
formerly been a very active member of the “Johnson” family. He was still
in good standing, although he had retired from the road after several
unfortunate experiments with burglary and robbery. It was late at night;
I took an hour to eat, and he listened with genuine sympathy to all the
harrowing details of my latest experience. At the cash register, where
he also officiated, my dollar was no good. He offered to share his room
with me, and when I declined, explaining that I would be too busy to
sleep, he magnanimously suggested that I “prowl the joint” he lived in.
This looked all right, and I took his room key with the understanding
that if anything went wrong in the place I could say I was looking for
his room and he would alibi for me.

It was late when I started to look through his hotel.  I lost half an
hour locating a sleeper with his door unlocked, and another half hour
pulling his moneyless trousers from under his head, where he had placed
them from force of habit. I fared better in another room, and, calling
it a night, hastened to my friend’s place to return his key and look
over my takings.

The restaurant was deserted. I joined him at a back table, where he sat
cleaning a row of water glasses. Blowing his breath into one, like a
housewife with a lamp chimney, he polished it carefully with a soiled
napkin. “Did you score?” he inquired.

“Yes,” I said.

I spread my money on the table to look it over.  My sad experience with
the twenty-dollar bill had made me careful. The paper money looked safe
enough, and so did the silver except one fifty-cent piece that was worn
smooth and had a monogram engraved on one side of it—a pocket piece or
keepsake.

“Take this out in the back and throw it away,” I said to him; “it’s
deadly poison.”

Instead, he rang it up on the register, saying, “That will pay your
check; no use wasting it. It will go to the bank in the morning.”

I went to his room and to bed. At seven o’clock he came in with this
amazing story, and I suggest a careful study of it by any young man who
thinks stealing is an exact science, and all he has to do is outwit the
coppers.

“Thirty minutes after you left the restaurant,” said he, “a guy came in
and ate his breakfast in silence.  He laid down a five-dollar bill to
pay his check and the four-bit piece you threw me was in the change I
gave him. He jumped stiff-legged and began frothing at the mouth when he
saw it.

“‘I was robbed last night in my room. I had to wake the clerk up this
morning and borrow five dollars. This fifty-cent piece is mine. I had it
last night.  It has my initials on it. I’ve carried it five years.  How
did it get into your till?’

“I told him I took it in an hour before from a short, stout, red-headed
man with a broken nose and about forty years old. He is going to have a
policeman at the place until the redhead shows up again. I promised to
point him out if I see him anywhere.  You’re safe; but you had better
eat somewhere else for a while.”




CHAPTER XXI


This strange coincidence of the marked piece of silver more than ever
convinced me of the necessity for keeping something ahead so I wouldn’t
be forced to go out and take long chances for short money.  With enough
in my pocket now to last me a month, I gave the town a thorough
canvassing for something worth while. I found many places that appeared
to be advertising for a burglar, and the most promising was the big
general store. It was packed to the roof with merchandise, and the
owners, to save floor space, had placed the safe behind stairs, where it
could not be seen from the street. I “pegged” the spot for a week and
satisfied myself that after the store was closed at night no one entered
it till opening-up time in the morning.

The expression, “I have him pegged,” which has crept into common usage,
is thieves’ slang pure and simple, and has nothing to do with the game
of cribbage as many suppose. The thief, to save himself the trouble of
staying up all night watching a spot to make sure no one enters after
closing hours, puts a small wooden peg in the door jamb after the place
is locked up. At five or six o’clock in the morning he takes a look. If
the peg is in place the door has not been opened. If it is found lying
in the doorway, that means somebody has opened the door in the night. If
he finds the place is visited in the night he must then stay out and
learn why and at what time and how often. He now has the place “pegged”
and plans accordingly or passes it up as too tough.

Dynamite and drills were to be had for the taking at any mine. I invited
my friend, the waiter, to “come in on the caper,” but he declined for
the very good reason that he had “done enough time.” Compared with the
work I had put in getting the mine payroll this was simple and I went
against it alone, confident of success and glad I wouldn’t have to split
the money with anybody. The “box” was of a make that has long been
extinct. It was an experiment on the part of the manufacturers, and a
costly one, for the “box men” soon found a fatal weakness in its make-up
and hungrily sought them out till the last one went into the junk pile.

The one I had designs on looked more like an old-fashioned clothes
closet than a receptacle for money.  Its four wheels rested on a heavy
wooden platform that served to reënforce the thin floor of the
storeroom. The work of putting a hole in it, placing the “shot,” and
laying a five-minute fuse took an hour.  The man that does this kind of
work alone must now take a look at the street to be sure there are no
late stragglers around. When he satisfies himself on this point he
returns and lights his fuse. While it is burning he goes back to the
street some distance away and plants himself in a hall or doorway till
he hears the explosion. Then when he is satisfied there is no alarm, he
goes after his money.

I was in the door of an all-night saloon when my explosion arrived.
Nobody appeared on the street and after a few minutes I went back to the
store to finish the business. Inside, I saw that my “shot” had resulted
in something entirely unforeseen. The outer plate of the door was torn
from its place and lying to one side, bent and twisted. The force of the
explosion had shifted the ponderous box from its platform.  It had
fallen forward on its face and ten sturdy burglars couldn’t have turned
it over. Had it remained upright the money would have been mine in five
minutes. Lying on its face, its contents were as safe from me as if they
had been in the town bank. The next day a gang of men turned it partly
over and one of the clerks finished opening it with a crowbar I left in
the store.

The storekeepers said “there was nothing in the safe anyway.” My friend,
the waiter, who stood by when it was opened, said they hurried to the
bank with a fat package and “what was in it was plenty.”

This failure took the heart out of me for a few days, and I don’t know
what depths of despondency I might have wallowed in but for my friend.
He suggested, with the best intentions I am sure, that I take a job
washing dishes in the place where he worked.  This was a jolt to my
pride. Of course I had nothing against dishwashers or dishwashing. I saw
that any able-bodied dishwasher would have more to show for his ten
years’ hard work than I had for mine, and if I had been in the notion of
going to work I would have taken that kind of job as quick as any. But
the thought of working was as foreign to me as the thought of burglary
or robbery would be to a settled printer or plumber after ten years at
his trade. I wasn’t lazy or indolent; I knew there were lots of easier
and safer ways of making a living, but they were the ways of other
people, people I didn’t know or understand, and didn’t want to. I didn’t
call them suckers or saps because they were different and worked for a
living. They represented society. Society represented law, order,
discipline, punishment. Society was a machine geared to grind me to
pieces. Society was an enemy. There was a high wall between me and
society; a wall reared by myself, maybe—I wasn’t sure. Anyway I wasn’t
going to crawl over the wall and join the enemy just because I had taken
a few jolts of hard luck.

I did go over the wall in the end and take my hat off to society and
admit I was wrong, but I didn’t do it because of discouragement, because
I was afraid of the future, because of the police. I didn’t do it
because I realized I was wrong; I knew I was wrong years before. I did
it because—but that’s a separate story, to be told later, in its place.

So, instead of following the waiter’s advice, I busied myself with a few
careful hotel burglaries, got a small bankroll together again, bought
some presentable clothes, and kept looking around for a decent piece of
money. The booming mining town had its share of gamblers, women of the
night, thieves, and hop fiends—nearly all of them renegades or fugitives
from the “American side.” Their leisure time was given to drinking or
smoking hop. I had weaned myself from gambling. I was naturally a light
drinker. So it fell out that, in this town of no amusements, the hop
joint claimed me.

One afternoon as I lay smoking my day’s portion of hop a voice, a
woman’s voice, strangely familiar, came to me through a thin partition
from the adjoining room. When she finished talking to the Chinese boy
that attended the hop layouts, I fell to wondering who the speaker could
be. My contact with women had been very limited, and it didn’t take much
elimination to fix the voice as that of the street girl of Chicago, the
girl from whose crib I had carried the dead man; the girl I avoided
because I believed she had carelessly killed him with an overdose of
some drug. Just to satisfy myself that I was right, more than anything,
I got up and stepped into her room.  No mistake; it was she. She knew me
instantly and I needed no introduction, no sponsor.

Irish Annie had changed. She was now a well-poised, confident woman. The
world had treated her better than it does most of her kind, and yet she
was not spoiled. She instantly referred to “that awful night,” and
sincerely acknowledged the service I had done her. We compared notes
roughly. She had left Chicago to avoid going to jail for a theft, and
after many hardships and adventures found herself in this British
Columbia mining camp. A lucky prospector in the mines, finding himself
rich overnight, had bought an establishment for her and she was
prospering.

To show her gratitude to me, she gave a blowout at her place, introduced
me to her “girls” as “an old friend from the States,” set a room apart
for me, and insisted upon me making her home my home. The Chinese boy
brought meals to my room, a hop layout was procured so I could smoke
in peace and security.  My room was more comfortable than any I could
have had in a hotel, the meals were better than at the restaurants, I
was treated with deference by everybody in the place, so I remained
there. I paid the rent on rent day, ordered the liquors and
provisions, and “slipped” the town marshal his “once a week.” The
Tenderloin, the marshal, and his deputies accepted me as Annie’s
protector and the man about the place—something I was not and did not
aspire to be. I didn’t take the trouble to enlighten them. I preferred
to have them believe anything rather than the truth.  This would make
my stealing easier.

This soft life that loomed before me in Irish Annie’s had about as much
lure for me as the dishwashing job. Without taking her into my
confidence, I went on with my burgling. That was my trade and I would
not leave it for a job in a restaurant, a “job” in Annie’s, or a
position in a bank.

Winter came with a rush and a roar. I had thought of getting away from
the North, but it came before I was prepared and there was nothing to do
but stick it out with the others.

Of all the gamblers that found their way into this camp “Swede Pete” was
probably the cleverest. I knew him from towns on the “American side,”
where he played in all the big poker games with more or less success. He
submitted a scheme to me that looked very good. His plan was to buy a
box of playing cards, mark each deck, and have me, as a capable burglar,
go into one of the big poker rooms, open the card locker, and substitute
his box of marked cards for a box of legitimate cards belonging to the
house.  I looked at the place and saw my end of the business would be
simple. He went to work on his cards, and after many days and nights of
patient toil put his “work” on them so he could read them from the back
as easily as from the front. When he had replaced the seals on each deck
and on the box that contained them, he put them in my hands and it was
but an hour’s work for me to put them in the locker and return to him
the full box that his had replaced.

The following night he sat in the game as usual.  Whenever he lost a pot
he threw the unlucky deck on the floor and ordered a fresh one. After a
night or two of this, the gamekeeper had to open a fresh box. This was
our box and Pete’s luck changed at once. In a couple of nights’ play he
got the long end of the money in the game. From what I heard and saw I
estimated his winnings, or stealings, at three thousand dollars. It was
understood that the money should be split evenly between us. When he
gave me my end of it he declared he had won but fifteen hundred and that
he had to have a man in the game with him and the money had to go three
ways. I took the five hundred dollars knowing I was getting the worst of
it and wondering how I could get even.

Pete was a big, six-foot, blond giant, good-natured, generous, and with
a laugh you could hear a block.  Everybody liked him; he was a good
spender and a good loser. He carried a bankroll of several thousand
dollars, as I knew, but the thought of robbing him never entered my mind
till he burnt me in the marked-card transaction. He was interested in a
saloon and had a game of his own in a rear room. I watched him carefully
and learned that when the game and the bar were closed for the night he
put his bankroll in the cash register, locked it, and went to bed in a
comfortable little room that adjoined the big barroom.  Apparently his
money was safe. He left his room door open; the register could not be
opened without waking him.

After thinking the matter over pro and con, I decided to beat off the
barroom, carry the register out and into the alley and smash it open
with an ax. Every night for a week I watched him from across the street
and saw him make up his cash for the day, then put his own money in the
register, lock it carefully, and go into his bedroom. Satisfied on this
point, I now kept away from his place so as not to be too fresh in his
mind on the morning after I got his money.

At last a stormy night came that drove everybody off the street. I kept
out of the neighborhood of Pete’s place till four o’clock in the
morning. I had no trouble getting into the barroom through a door
opening into the hall that separated the saloon from the hotel office.
Carefully removing a lot of glasses from around the register, I lifted
it and placed it on the bar. Then I had to go around the bar, pick it up
again, and carry it out into the hall where I put it on a table while I
went back to close the door. All the while Swede Pete was snoring like a
horse.

Lifting the heavy weight again, I made my way slowly to the sidewalk.
Groping along in the blinding storm of snow and sleet, I missed my
footing and fell flat on my back with the heavy register fair on my
chest. Its sharp edge dug into my ribs and although I never went to a
doctor, I believe to this day a couple of them were cracked or
splintered. Unable to lift it again, I tied my handkerchief in the grill
work at the top of the thing and painfully dragged it to an opening
between two buildings and down into the alley where I had planted an ax.

I was morally certain Pete’s money was in it. I saw him put it there the
night before, but on this last night I had kept away, not caring to be
seen about his place.  There was one chance in a million that he hadn’t
locked the register, so before attacking it with the ax I touched one of
the keys. The bell did not ring, but the cash drawer opened. But to my
dismay it did not slide out with the slow, labored, obese movement of a
cash drawer loaded with heavy gold and silver; instead it shot out with
a thin, empty, hollow jerk that told me there was nothing in it.

With numb and freezing fingers I explored the little cups only to find
them bare of coin. The compartments in the back gave up no fat bankroll.
The thing was as empty and as inviting as a new-dug grave. This last
blow was too much for my philosophy. Cursing the snow and sleet and
every organic thing, I started back determined to go into Pete’s bedroom
and search for his money. I was too late. At the door I looked into the
hall and saw the porter limbering up for another day’s work.

Sad and sore I turned away and trudged through the storm to my room at
Irish Annie’s where I found food and drink and light and heat and the
consoling hop layout.

I was out early the next afternoon to find out what had happened at
Swede Pete’s that caused him to shift his money. He was around town
drunk as a ragman, going from one bar to another, buying drinks for all
hands, and telling with great relish how he had saved his bankroll from
the “burglars.” I heard his boisterous laugh as I was passing one of the
saloons and went in to get an earful. He threw an American twenty-dollar
piece on the bar, and as it bounced up and down, roared: “Yump, you
beggar, yump! Many times I ha’ to yump for you.” Then everybody was
invited to drink and listen to his tale.

I gathered from it that his cash register “bane on the bum.” Something
got wrong with its locking arrangement the night before, and Pete took
his money to bed with him. “Ay take the old bankroll and throw her under
the mattress and lay my two hundred pounds Swede beef on her,” he
finished with a roar. Then, bouncing another gold piece on the bar, he
ordered it to “yump” and the house to drink. If he suspected me he
didn’t show it, and I went out not relishing his talk or his liquor. I
thought of sticking him up, but he knew my voice and that wouldn’t do. I
thought of chloroform, but my awful experience with the Chinamen warned
me against it. I had no desire to get tangled up with Pete’s “two
hundred pounds Swede beef” that wasn’t beef at all, but bone and muscle
he put on in his youth as a laborer in the Northwest lumber camps. After
much thought, I let him go and gave him up as a total loss.

I don’t know what the statistics show, but I should say that for every
five hundred burglaries one burglar gets arrested. On the other hand, my
experiences showed that if the burglar gets what he is after one time in
five he is lucky.

After my bad luck with the big Swede I sat down and gave my system of
stealing a good overhauling. As near as I could calculate ten thousand
dollars had slipped out of my hands since I left Los Angeles. I wasn’t
satisfied to put this down to tough luck entirely.  I saw that
carelessness had something to do with it. I should have planted the mine
payroll in a safer place.  A more careful and experienced “blacksmith”
would have taken measures to prevent that big safe from falling on its
face and burying the money beyond reach, and in the matter of Swede Pete
I was careless and overconfident, in not checking on him the night I
went after his money. Figuring that my luck was about due to change for
the better, I resolved to pull myself together, tighten up my system,
and look around me for something else.

If business houses took as much precaution in protecting themselves from
thieves as thieves do in protecting themselves from the police, the
business of burglary and robbery would reach the vanishing point in no
time. Thieves are occasionally careless; business men are habitually so;
both pay for their carelessness sooner or later.

In looking about for some worth-while endeavor, I came upon an instance
of carelessness on the part of a business man that I never saw equaled
in all my years of stealing. It cost him a small fortune in diamonds and
sent him into the bankruptcy court. The Christmas holidays were coming
on, and the jewelry store in this mining camp spread out a display of
stones that would have done credit to any large city. I was naturally
attracted; and began investigating the jeweler’s system. I found that he
slept on the premises in a room back of his storeroom. He testified in
court later that he carried no burglary insurance, that he could not get
fire insurance because the town had no fire department, and that he
slept in his store to protect himself in case of fire or attempted
theft. I watched him closely through every business hour of the day—from
seven to eight o’clock one day, from eight to nine the next, from nine
to ten the next—and so on through the entire day from his opening hour
till he closed at night. I found that he left his store in darkness to
save on the light bill, and to my amazement I also found that, instead
of locking his safe carefully and completely at night, he gave the
combination knob only a quarter turn, leaving it “on the quarter,” or
only partly locked and at the mercy of any one with a working knowledge
of combination locks.

This putting out of the lights and careless locking of his safe was
entirely due to a feeling of security because he slept in his place of
business.

After gathering every scrap of information available, I was sure I could
“take” the spot if I got a fair break on the luck. The rear room of the
place was used as a workshop. This made it possible to enter the back
door without waking the owner, who slept in a small room between the
shop and the big front storeroom. When I decided to go against this
thing, I sat down and looked far ahead.

The stones would have to go to the “American side” to be disposed of in
some big city. I decided on San Francisco and planned my route there.
Irish Annie was no small problem. I had no intention of confiding in her
or giving her any part of the junk, if I got it. I was under no
obligation to her. Our relations were just those of two social outcasts,
thrown together by chance, and our parting could mean nothing to either
of us. To disarm any suspicions she might have later on, I told her I
planned to go to Carson City, Nevada, for the big fight between
Fitzsimmons and Corbett.  This would give me a reasonable excuse for
leaving after the burglary.

With the five hundred dollars I got from Swede Pete and more I had
picked up around the hotels, I was amply supplied with expense money and
had no worry on that point. Two weeks ahead I bought an old Indian
cayuse and a cheap secondhand saddle and bridle, planning to ride across
the boundary line fifteen miles distant, plant the junk, and return
before the burglary was discovered.

The old horse was staked out in a corral where I could get him at any
time. I even rode to the “American side,” crossing the Columbia River,
which marked the boundary, on the ice, and picked out a place to plant
my stuff. A week ahead I rented a front room in a lodging house across
the street and from my window watched every move in the store every
evening. I saw the boss go out to dinner, leaving the place in charge of
his clerk and an apprentice boy. I saw his man in the repair shop go out
and away. I saw the boy go home after the boss returned, and later saw
the clerk depart. An hour after, the owner began gathering the most
valuable articles from show window and show cases, placing them in
specially made trays and boxes that fitted snugly in the safe. Then the
big door swung shut, and a quarter turn of the knob locked it so that it
could be opened quickly in the morning by the lazy, careless owner, or
just as quickly at night by an industrious, careful burglar.

My mistake in not checking Swede Pete the night before was not repeated
here. When the final night came I stood in the snowstorm outside the
window, cap pulled down and overcoat buttoned up, looking carelessly at
the cheap articles he left there overnight.  When he locked his safe as
usual, I went back to my room across the street and saw him secure his
front door, put out the lights, and go back into his bedroom.

At one o’clock I was at the back door of the store and after a few
minutes of the most careful work I stood in the warm workshop where a
big stove still glowed in the dark. The doors inside were open to allow
the warm air passage into the sleeper’s room and the front room beyond.
I had all the luck at last.

There was no serious obstacle. The sleeper slept on. The safe door
opened as easy for me as for him.  The inside of the safe was like a
beehive—fifty watches, wound up, ticked noisily. Some years ago jewelers
thought watches should be kept running all or part of the time to insure
perfection. I believe this is no longer done. For fear their ticking
should wake the sleeper when I passed through his room on my way out, I
wrapped them in their box in my overcoat. Taking nothing else except
some gold rings, all the stones, and what money was in the cash drawer,
I closed the safe, went back out the rear door and, closing it
carefully, departed unseen.

All my junk went into a grain bag at the corral, where I kept the old
cayuse. He was gentle as a dog, but the ticking of the watches almost
drove him frantic.  He reared and pawed and snorted in fear. I couldn’t
get into the saddle, and had to snub him up to a tree where, for ten or
fifteen minutes, I let him listen to the ticks and get over his fright.
At last he cooled off and allowed me to mount him and turn his head
south toward the “line.” Riding away, I looked back over the night’s
work and thought with satisfaction that no human being could possibly
suspect me of it.

In the small town across the line I planted the stones and cash
carefully in the plant I had prepared, but put the watches in another
place where they could tick themselves out in security. At seven o’clock
in the morning the faithful old horse was back in the corral, well fed
and rubbed down, and I was in my room at Irish Annie’s. In the afternoon
she came in with the small town “Extra” paper. I saw that this burglary,
one of the simplest and easiest of my life, was by far the most
profitable. Diamonds valued at twenty thousand dollars, wholesale price,
fifty watches, five hundred dollars cash, and a parcel of gold wedding
rings roughly outlined the loss. I immediately “pooh-poohed” the
business to her, telling her I knew enough about burglary to see that it
was an inside job and that it was done by the storekeeper to beat his
creditors.  She believed me and no suspicion whatever found lodgment in
her mind.

The next day’s paper questioned the burglary. It was hard to believe
that any sane man could be guilty of such carelessness as the jeweler
frankly admitted.  He also admitted that the stock was taken on
consignment, that the stones were not paid for, and that if they were
not recovered he would be broke and bankrupted. The town was divided as
to whether he had robbed himself, and the marshal and his deputies
remained dormant.

I paid another week’s board for the old horse, and another week’s rent
for the room opposite the jeweler’s. I had no use for them any more, but
thought it safest not to give either of them up too soon and chance
arousing suspicion.

After a restless month I said good-bye to Annie and to the “Canadian
side.” Leaving the watches and rings where they were, I dug up the plant
of stones and cash, and went into Spokane, where I threw away my good
clothes, put on overalls, a mackinaw coat, a lumberjack’s cap, and
bought a cheap ticket to Seattle. There I changed again, buying an
expensive outfit of clothes and other things necessary for the traveler.
Three days later I was in San Francisco, safe, secure, and unsuspected.

My first act was to put the stones in a safety box, tear up the receipt,
and plant the key in a safe, convenient place. Then began the toughest
part of the business, getting the stones off my hands and into cash.
Day after day I sorted out the larger ones and in my room “unharnessed”
them from their settings. Other articles, clusters and sunbursts, were
left intact in their settings—to remove them would depreciate the value.
I had many of the best stones reset and sold them for fair prices openly
to bookmakers, prize fighters, jockeys, gamblers, and women about town.
My money went into the bank, and for the first time in my life I carried
a check book.

I was careful, kept clean and sober and away from the hop joints and
thieves’ hangouts. For once in my life I managed to get a fair price
from pawnshops for some of my junk. Taking one of the reset rings that
was perfectly safe and impossible of identification, I would step into
the pawnbroker’s at lunch time and always when there were other patrons
in his place.  The average thief is duck soup for the hockshop man.  He
will walk by the hockshop and look in. The hockshop man sees him and
knows he has something “hot,” or crooked. If there is anybody in the
place but the employees, the thief waits till they go out before going
in. This convinces the pawnbroker he has a thief to deal with and he
offers him half what he would offer an honest man with a legitimate
article.

Instead of sneaking into a hockshop, taking a ring out of my pocket, and
saying, “How much can I get on this?” I walked in confidently, held out
my finger with the ring on, and said: “I want to pledge this ring for
one hundred dollars till pay day. My name is so-and-so.  I work for such
and such a firm. I lost some of my employer’s money at the race track
and must have it to-night.”

I always asked for a sum far in excess of what I expected, but that
served to convince the pawnbroker I knew nothing about pawning things,
that I was honest, that the ring was mine and that I would probably
redeem it. After inspecting it, he would offer me much more than if he
thought it was crooked. If it was redeemed he would get his big
interest, and if not he would still be safely below the wholesale price,
which is the dead line for him.

In one way and another I unloaded most of my stones to advantage. I
could go about with them one at a time in safety; they were impossible
of identification when out of their original settings. While I was
trying to find some safe way of selling the pieces I had left in their
settings, I met by chance a young chap I had known on the road. He had
settled down, got married, and was making a semi-legitimate and
uncertain living gambling. He was square enough, and I arranged with him
to sell them for me. He was in San Francisco when the burglary was
committed and was in no danger of being charged with it if he did get
arrested.

He got rid of them quickly to his friends in the Tenderloin and to small
pawnshops, getting a price that satisfied me and left him a good profit.
I cleaned everything up and quit with eight thousand dollars in the bank
and several very nice stones that I wanted to keep. Of late I had
thought of buying a saloon some time and leaving the burglary business.
Now, as I looked over the small dives and joints with their
hangers-around, their discordant pianos and beery-voiced singers, and
drunken, bedraggled women, I found they had no attraction. Now that I
could have one of those places I didn’t want it.

The notion of going into any decent business never occurred to me.
Without any definite notion of what to do, I settled down to have a few
months of ease and relaxation. The race tracks and gambling houses were
running wide open, but I kept away from them and didn’t get hurt. The
wine dumps, the “Coast,” Chinatown, and the dingy dives that fascinated
me when I first saw them, no longer held anything of interest.

I’m not finding fault with these brave days of jungle music, synthetic
liquor, and dimple-kneed maids, and anybody that thinks the world is
going to the bowwows because of them ought to think back to San
Francisco or any other big city of twenty years ago—when train
conductors steered suckers against the bunko men; when coppers located
“work” for burglars and stalled for them while they worked; when
pickpockets paid the police so much a day for “exclusive privileges” and
had to put a substitute “mob” in their district if they wanted to go out
of town to a country fair for a week.  Those were the days when there
were saloons by the thousand; when the saloonkeeper ordered the police
to pinch the Salvation Army for disturbing his peace by singing hymns in
the street; when there were race tracks, gambling unrestricted, crooked
prize fights; when there were cribs by the mile and hop joints by the
score. These things may exist now, but if they do, I don’t know where. I
knew where they were then, and with plenty of money and leisure I did
them all.




CHAPTER XXII


The young fellow that helped me dispose of the stones was the wayward
son of a fine family and it would not be right to them to use his name.
I will call him “Spokane,” the monoger he was known by among his
associates. He had been in San Francisco for years and was familiar with
an underworld that I had seen very little of. Most of my life had been
spent on the road or roughing it in out-of-the-way places, broken by a
few months now and then in city slums. He introduced me into the elegant
hop joints where we smoked daily, into the hangouts of polished bunko
men and clever pickpockets, into the gilded cafés and other exclusive
and refined places of entertainment.

I grew tired of this life after a few months and suggested to Spokane
that he go up to the Canadian line and lift the plant of watches and
rings. The burglary cry had died out and I had arranged to sell them all
where they would never rise up to accuse me. This trip suited him, as it
would give him a chance to visit his people in Spokane, Washington, and
it pleased me to have him go because I didn’t want to take chances with
the watches which were all numbered and easy of identification. I had
left them behind me rather than carry the bulky package around and
chance losing the more valuable stones because of it. I gave him a
diagram of the spot where the plant was, supplied him with tickets and
traveling expenses, and sent him on his way with instructions to express
the parcel to the San Francisco express office, value it at twenty-five
dollars, and tell the express agent it contained samples of ore.

To make everything safe and sure, I further instructed him to stand at
the depot when the train was in and make sure the parcel went into the
express car, then to take a train the next day and come back to San
Francisco by an indirect route which would protect him in case anything
happened to the package en route.  I put in a couple of anxious weeks,
but he showed up in due time with the good news that he had located the
junk without trouble and sent it along exactly as he had promised. He
called for it at the express office the next day, but it hadn’t arrived.
Not caring to make too much fuss over a package valued at twenty-five
dollars, we waited a few days before he went back for it. The express
office was in Montgomery Street then, and I stood in the Palace Hotel
entrance where I could look across the street and see him showing the
receipt and arguing with the clerks. His willingness to go to the office
every day convinced me he was on the square.  He had a receipt for the
package; I assumed it had gone astray.

We talked the thing over and decided there was nothing to be afraid of.
If the parcel had been seized by the police he would have been pinched
at the express office. I began to get suspicious after a week and was
for abandoning the whole thing, but Spokane insisted on making another
call. From my spot across the street I saw two men fall on him when he
spoke to the clerk and knew he was arrested.

I went straight to my room, got everything and moved to another, where I
sat down and tried to figure out what had happened and what to do. His
arrest was a mystery, but it was plain to me that I must either jump out
on him or stay and help. I was clean, there wasn’t a scrap of evidence
against me. If I deserted him that might cause him to squawk, and with
his testimony they could convict me if they got me. I knew the police
would accuse him of the burglary and that he could and would convince
them in an hour that he was in San Francisco when it occurred. That
would start them on a hunt for another man, and that would bring them to
me, for I had been seen with him daily for months. I saw I would be
picked up; I saw they could prove I was in the town where the burglary
was committed, and at the time. But they could get no further. The
evidence to convict me was not in existence. I could not be convicted
without Spokane’s testimony.

I was reasonably certain he would protect me if I protected him. I sent
and found that the police had not been to the room I deserted; that
meant he was standing up. I decided to stay and take a pinch and have
the business settled while I had money to fight.  After making this
decision I cleaned up a few odds and ends of jewelry, put them away in
my safety box, and left the key in a secure place. I took a thousand
dollars in hundred-dollar bills and secreted it in different parts of my
clothes. The pawn tickets had all been destroyed the minute we got them.
I felt perfectly secure, and went openly around the hangouts waiting for
the blow to fall.

It came in a hurry, and to my surprise I was put in the cell occupied by
Spokane. I learned later that the cell had some kind of listening
arrangement, but we did not discuss our troubles. We were both “on the
small book,” which meant incommunicado, but I promised a trusty prisoner
a dollar if he would get word out to an attorney I had in mind. He was
one of the leading criminal lawyers at that time, and had us both out to
talk to him the next morning. The evening papers carried the story of my
arrest and of the burglary.  The attorney had read it, and seeing it was
a case of considerable magnitude he came at once. He did not believe in
any fat fees being held incommunicado.

I gave him a substantial retainer and asked him to find out what we were
charged with and what we were being held on. Spokane had got barely an
hour’s sleep at one time in the three days he had been in.  Policemen
and detectives took turn about questioning him, trying to wear him down
to the weakening point. They now started on me, threatening, blustering,
cajoling, wheedling, and promising. I made no statement except that I
was innocent. There was no local interest in the case, and we were not
mistreated. Captain Lindheimer, long dead now, was in charge of the city
prison. He frowned on the beating-up of prisoners, and there was very
little of it done when he was in charge. He was a very humane man, and
of all the prisoners that passed through his hands I don’t recall ever
hearing one with a harsh word for him.

Our attorney had influence enough to get our meals sent from the
outside; we bought clean, new blankets from the head trusty and plenty
of opium, which we ate. Spokane’s wife was permitted to visit us, the
police probably figuring they could follow her to something that would
convict us. She had not been told anything, knew nothing, and could do
us no harm.

Out of my thousand dollars I got in with, I saw to it that she was taken
care of. This was only fair to Spokane, and helped him to help me by
keeping his mouth shut.

The attorney could learn nothing except that we were being held on
telegrams. “This is soft,” he said.  “They can’t hold you on that. I’ll
take you out on a writ of habeas corpus.”

The next morning we went into court on the writ.  The court gave the
police twenty-four hours to get something more substantial than
telegrams, threatening to liberate us if they failed. When we appeared
the next day they had nothing except more telegrams, and we were
discharged from custody.

I grabbed the attorney’s hand. “Don’t get excited,” he said, “they’re
not done with you yet.”

Although the judge released us we were promptly rearrested at the
courtroom door and put in our cell.  The attorney applied for another
writ. This was granted and we went to court again the next day, but were
put over twenty-four hours on the plea of the police that witnesses were
on their way from Canada.  No witnesses appeared, and we were discharged
only to be arrested again. The court warned the police that they would
be in contempt if we were held longer without evidence.

On our next day in court we were confronted by the chief of provincial
detectives from Victoria with a warrant of extradition and a day was set
for him to make his showing. One night a strange attorney came to me in
the prison, told me he had had a talk with the judge, and that for a
sum of money he would point out a flaw in the case that would upset
the extradition plea. I sent for my attorney and asked his advice. He
investigated, and told me to put up the money.

When we went into court the Canadian officer produced his warrant. It
was the biggest document I ever saw—a piece of parchment about three
feet long, embossed, engraved, and signed and sealed with the seal of
Queen Victoria—a formal demand from the British Government on the
Secretary of State to deliver us over to the Canadian authorities. He
had it in a bag carefully rolled and wrapped in paper. Taking it out
carefully, reverently, he placed it in the judge’s hands.

“Where did you get this document?” the court asked.

“From Ottawa, the capital of Canada,” the officer answered.

“Did you go to Ottawa yourself for it?”

“No, it came to Victoria by mail.”

Looking at it closely the judge pointed to a name signed at the bottom.
“What’s this?” he asked.

“That is the signature of Lord Aberdeen, governor general of Canada.”

“Did you see him sign it?”

“No.”

“Hm,” said the judge, laying it down.

Our lawyer picked it up and appeared to read it carefully. Turning to
the officer, he asked: “How do you know that is Lord Aberdeen’s
signature? Were you there when he signed it? Did you ever see him sign
his name to any paper? Did you ever see Lord Aberdeen? What’s this
thing?” He tapped the seal, the big red seal half as large as your hand.

“That is the seal of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria of England,” the man
answered, getting indignant and red in the face.

“Oh, it is, is it? How do you know it is? Did you see her put it there?
Is she here to identify it? There’s no Victoria here in this court, is
there? This might be the seal of Jane Doe, a waitress. Anybody can have
a seal. Do you think the court is going to recognize this thing? You’ll
have to come in here with something better than that,” he said, throwing
it on the floor and kicking it under a table.

The officer got down from the witness stand, picked it up, brushed it
off, and carefully put it away.

The judge then said: “This court cannot recognize that as a valid
document. You come here with a paper demanding custody of these
defendants, but we have here no proof that it is genuine. It might be a
forgery.  We know there is such a person as Lord Aberdeen, of Canada,
but we have no proof that his signature is on that warrant. I cannot
hold defendants on such evidence.”

We were discharged again. I don’t know where the money went that I gave
the lawyer who sold us the point that beat the extradition; I know the
judge didn’t give us any the worst of it.

We were arrested again at the door. That night we were indicted by the
grand jury; I for bringing stolen property into the state of California,
and Spokane for receiving it from me. The police saw we were framing and
using money, so they, rather than be beaten, began framing us. Our cases
were transferred into another court where they could do some fixing, and
we couldn’t.  The indictments meant that we would have to wait for
trial. I began to get uneasy about the stones I had in the safety box.
The police were tearing the town open for them, not knowing that nearly
all of them had been sold. I told our lawyer where to get the key to the
box, gave him a password, and told him to take the junk out and put it
in some safe place. The police “tailed” every visitor we had and even
the lawyer in hopes of locating the stones, and he had to be careful.

Making another application for a writ of habeas corpus, which he knew
would not avail us, he had the hearing set for ten o’clock in the
morning. This alarmed the coppers and every one of them was at the
courtroom when the case was called. Everybody was there but our
attorney. The hearing was held up for fifteen minutes. During this
fifteen minutes he was at the safety vault lifting the plant, while
every detective on the case was waiting in court. He came in, nodded to
us, apologized to the court, and went on with the case with the parcel
of loot in his pocket. The writ was denied, of course. I told him to put
the stuff away, and he did.

When I asked him about it later, he looked me straight in the eye and
said: “Did you think I was damn fool enough to keep that stuff around
me? Say, when court adjourned that day I went straight down to the foot
of Powell Street and threw it in the bay.”

This didn’t look just right to me, but what could I do? I was only a
poor, honest burglar in the hands of a highway lawyer. He got us a copy
of the testimony given the grand jury, and from it I learned what had
caused our arrest—Spokane’s passion for gambling.

After lifting the watches and rings in the little Northern town, he
tried his luck at the faro table and lost his expense money. This forced
him to open the parcel and sell a couple of the watches to a gambler for
enough money to buy his return ticket. The next day the gambler took
them to the town where I stole them, fifteen miles away, across the
line, and tried to pawn them. He was arrested and told where he got
them. In an hour the police learned about the express package of “sample
ore” Spokane shipped. It was seized en route to San Francisco. There was
a big reward for the burglar, and the Northern police, wanting it,
decided to capture him. Instead of wiring to have him arrested the first
time he went to the express office, they hurried here and got him
themselves.

Spokane was repentant, but it was too late. I did not reproach him.

His wife was faithful, and devoted to him, and visited us daily at the
prison, bringing papers and small delicacies. One evening, while we were
chatting on a bench in the visiting room, an officer came and took him
out to another room. Several policemen were standing around, and there
seemed to be something stagy going on that I couldn’t understand.
Suddenly, as I sat talking to Mrs. Spokane, a screen at the other side
of the room was knocked aside and Irish Annie dashed from behind it,
heaping abuse on me and trying to get her hands on my friend’s wife.

Annie’s furious appearance was like a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. I
saw instantly that she had been poisoned against me. I tried to talk to
her but she wouldn’t listen, and the coppers stood between us pushing me
away to make her think I was trying to get my hands on her and strangle
her. Mrs. Spokane had collapsed on the bench, almost fainting from fear
and wondering what it was about. Annie was led away screaming threats.
Spokane’s wife went home, and we back to our cell where we tried to
piece together this unexpected angle.

I saw the police were playing my game better than I could. They knew I
was trying to frame myself out; they began framing me in, and with Irish
Annie they had a dangerous lead on me. It was plain to me that they had
told her she was discarded for another woman; that they had called
Spokane away to leave me alone with his wife while Annie watched from
behind the screen. I could almost hear them saying to her: “There you
are. There’s the woman he left you for. There’s the woman he hung his
diamonds on, and spends his money on. How he got her is a mystery to us;
she’s a decent woman. She’s crazy about him and believes he is
innocent.”

Then Annie, too ready to believe herself “a woman scorned,” turned
copper on me, knocked the screen away, and poured out the vials of her
wrath. Still I wasn’t much alarmed about the case and I couldn’t help
admiring the coppers for the way they tooled Annie and chiseled her out
of her right senses. They assumed I was guilty; that gave them the right
to assume that she, being my companion, knew something about the
burglary. They were justified in getting it out of her by fair or unfair
means. I knew she was ignorant of the least detail of it, and felt like
laughing at them for wasting time on their elaborate scheme.

Our attorney made many efforts to see her, but the police had her in a
hotel under the eye of a matron, and he and his runners failed.

At last he subpœnaed her as our witness and had her brought to his
office. All his eloquence got nothing out of her. She was mute and
stayed mute till the day of my trial. She had not been before the grand
jury.  We had no police-court examination and there was no way of
finding out what she was going to say till she went into court. The
attorney was apprehensive. I wasn’t. I told him of the night I first met
her shivering in a Chicago doorway, of the warm clothing I got for her,
and of the night I staggered out of her crib with the dead man over my
shoulder. I told him in detail of our meeting in the North by chance,
and of our relations there. He was old and wise. He shook his head
thoughtfully and quoted the poet’s line about scorned women and their
hellish fury.

The prosecution clamored for a speedy trial of the case. Almost ten
thousand dollars had been spent by the Canadian authorities in retaining
a firm of high-priced lawyers to prosecute; in transporting witnesses
and paying hotel and other bills, and for private detectives hired to
spy on the local police. Still no diamonds showed up. Spokane was
offered a job with the Pinkerton Detective Agency if he would turn on
me. I was promised my liberty if I would turn up the stones. We kept up
our cry of innocence and made no statements at any time. A week before
the day set for my trial, our attorney was stricken in his study and
died in his chair, of heart failure.

We had to get another lawyer and pay another stiff fee. I went over the
case with him, but somehow was unable to convince him that I had not
talked too much to Irish Annie.

At my trial she swore, and she wasn’t mealy-mouthed about it, either,
that I told her of the burglary when I was planning it; that I offered
her part of the stones when I got them; that she was afraid to take them
because they were stolen. She added that she would have notified the
police then, but was afraid I would kill her or have her killed. On
cross-examination she said she was not testifying in hope of a reward or
in revenge; that she was glad to be rid of me, and hoped I would be
sentenced to life so I couldn’t get out and murder her.

The next witness was a pawnbroker the police dug up. Spokane had sold
him a piece of jewelry. It was identified by the loser and put in
evidence. The witness identified me as the one who sold it to him and
produced his book showing a fictitious name Spokane had signed. I got
alarmed and protested loudly. Spokane, who was in court, jumped up and
cried out to the judge that he pawned the article. The court ordered him
to sit down, and my lawyer told him if he testified to that, he would be
convicted on his own statement of receiving it from me, when his trial
came on. Our attorney tried to get a sample of my handwriting before the
jury. The prosecutors objected, and the judge ruled that no exemplars
could be admitted in evidence unless they were written before the
burglary was committed. I could not dig up any that old, and the case
went to the jury with no defense except my sworn denial of guilt.

When the jury disappeared in their room and court was adjourned, I lit a
cigarette. Before I had half finished, the jury was back with their
verdict, “Guilty, as charged.”

Spokane’s trial was set, but I made affidavit that he was an innocent
tool in the matter, and he was dismissed. He worried himself sick
because of his carelessness in getting me arrested and in a few months
fell a victim of tuberculosis. His devoted wife contracted it in nursing
him and long before I was at liberty they were both dead and buried.

In due time I was sentenced to eight years at Folsom. The case went on
appeal to the supreme court and I settled down for a long wait in the
old Broadway county jail. My case gave me food for much interesting
thought. I was guilty. Justice had overtaken me.  But let us see how
justice fared. It seemed to me that the blind goddess got a tough deal
herself.  Everybody connected with the case outraged her. The first
judge took money. The coppers framed me in. The witnesses perjured
themselves. The second judge was so feloniously righteous that he stood
in with the framing. My lawyer was a receiver of stolen goods—even stole
some from me. And the police told me that the Jewelers’ Association beat
them out of the reward.

That’s one side of the case; here’s another. The jeweler was bankrupt.
The Canadian authorities spent ten thousand dollars. The state of
California had to feed and clothe me while I was in prison.

Here’s another side of it. Spokane and his wife died of T.B. that he
contracted while in jail; and “justice” overtook Irish Annie for what
she had done to me.

Not very pleasant reflections; especially when I had to admit to myself
that I was the cause of everything from the burglary to the punishment
of Annie, and all that happened in between them. Yet this burglary is by
no means unique. It frequently happens that the initial loss in dollars
and cents is as nothing compared to the wrong and injury that radiate
from such crimes like ripples on a pond.




CHAPTER XXIII


My first few months in the county jail were put in hard enough. About
all I did was hate Irish Annie, and plan ways and means to revenge
myself on her. I kept close track of her through friends and learned
that her punishment began the day she got back to Canada.  Her girls
left her establishment when they saw her turn copper; her friends in the
Tenderloin shunned her as if she had the leprosy. Finding herself cast
out by these outcasts, she gathered up what she could and joined the
gold rush to Alaska.

Then, just when my bankroll had melted away under the heavy expense of
two attorneys’ fees and incidentals, and I was beginning to wonder if I
would finish by having to eat the jail fare, a number of mysterious
money orders came to me from Nome and Skagway.  I couldn’t but think
this was conscience money from Annie. This took the edge off my hatred
and I began making excuses for her. After I had several hundred dollars,
the money orders stopped coming. No letter or explanation came, and I
remained mystified. At last a prisoner who was brought into the jail en
route to San Quentin from Alaska put an end to my guessing.

Irish Annie was dead. My informant was very discreet and mentioned no
names. “Certain people,” he said, “and good people, too, found out that
she had a bunch of dough. They went into her crib, tied her up, and took
it. When they went out, one of them said to the others: ‘Black is in the
county jail in San Francisco. He ought to have one end of this money.
That woman put him there.’

“They didn’t know she had snitched on you and objected to splitting you
in with the coin. The first party, your friend, went back into the crib,
and croaked her. When he came out he said: ‘I’ve done that for Black.
Now, does he get his end?’

“You got it, didn’t you?”

I acknowledged the money and asked no questions.  My attorney learned
later, and told me, that when she was found dead and her body
identified, the police began a search for me, and the only thing that
saved me was my jail alibi, the only alibi that ever convinced anybody.

With Annie off my mind I then began hating the pawnbroker. But before I
went to Folsom he was charged with perjury in another case and went
broke saving himself from a prison sentence, and I put him out of my
mind.

I didn’t worry about the coppers framing me in. I started it. It was
their business to put me away if they could, and if they hadn’t played
my game I would have beaten the case on them. It has always been a
question with me where this framing and jobbing started; whether the
defense originally began it and forced the prosecutor and police to do
it in self-defense, or whether it was the other way around. I never
could find the answer; long ago I gave it up and filed it away with that
other old question about the hen and the egg.

My attorney knew his business. He held me in the county jail till my
last dollar was gone, and I refused to “write for more money” as he
suggested. When I was leaving for Folsom he showed up at the jail and
asked me for my watch, the only thing of value I had left.

“You won’t have any use for it up there,” he said.  “Give it to me and
I’ll get you a job in the warden’s where you’ll get something to eat.”

I told him to go plumb to hell.

I went to prison without any plans for the future.  With good conduct I
would have to do five years and four months and there was no use trying
to look that far ahead. Two other prisoners arrived the morning I did,
and the three of us were taken out to the office to have our prison
biographies written—name, age, birthplace, occupation, etc. We were then
photographed, measured, and weighed, and turned over to the captain to
be assigned to work.

Richard Murphy (“Dirty Dick” the “cons” called him) was captain at that
time. He had worked his way up from the guard line by cunning and
brutality.  He believed in “throwing the fear of God” into a prisoner
the minute he arrived, by browbeating and bullying him, and every man
went out of his office hating him. It’s more than twenty years since I
left Folsom, but I can still see Dirty Dick’s short, squat figure on the
flagstones in front of his filthy office. I can still see his pop-eyes
and pasty face, his frog belly, his knock knees, and his flat feet.

I was the first to be questioned. “Where are you from?” he asked.

“San Francisco,” I replied.

“How long did you do in San Quentin?”

“Never was in San Quentin.”

“What other penitentiary were you in?”

“Never was in any penitentiary,” I lied, and I knew he knew I was lying,
but wouldn’t give him the satisfaction of thinking he had bullied me
into telling the truth.

“Hah, you’re a liar, and you know it. You can’t get anything like that
by me. I’ll dig you up, and find out all about you. Use hop?”

“No.” I did use hop, had eaten it all the time in the county jail, and
had a small portion secreted about me then. He again called me a liar
and said to a convict runner: “Here, Shorty, take this fellow to the
stoneyard. Search him, and if you find anything you want, keep it.”

I had already been searched and had nothing but a handkerchief and a
pipe. “No prisoner will keep anything belonging to me,” I said, looking
at Shorty. He didn’t search me.

The captain called up the second man. “Where are you from?”

“Sacramento,” he answered.

“How long do you bring?”

“Ten years.”

“What for?”

“Grand larceny.”

“What kind of grand larceny?”

The little runner, Shorty, stepped up and said: “Pickpocket, captain.”

“Where do you belong?” Murphy continued.

“Chicago.”

“What’s your name?”

“James Brown.”

“You’re from Chicago, eh? And your name is Brown? What do they call you?
What’s your monoger?”

The little runner stepped up again and said: “‘Chi Jimmy,’ captain.”

“Chi Jimmy, eh? Pickpocket, eh? The rock crusher for you,” said the
captain. “Maybe you’ll be ‘Chi’ a few fingers before you get out.”

Which he probably would be. This was Murphy’s idea of a joke.

The third chap got about the same deal, and was waved away. “To the
crusher with him, too.”

At that time prisoners were allowed, for economy, to keep the coats,
vests, and hats they brought in with them, but were made to wear striped
pants and shirts.  As the last man turned away, Murphy saw he had a good
hat. Calling him back he took it and threw it to his runner. “Here’s a
hat for you, Shorty. If you can’t wear it give it to somebody else; it’s
too good for the rock crusher.”

He knew all about us before we were brought to his office, and had us
out there only to “throw the fear” into us and get a line on us by the
way we answered his questions. He made three enemies right there. He
received all prisoners that way and if they got insolent under his
badgering he had them thrown into the dungeon for thirty days “to cool
off.”

The dungeon was an empty cell with a solid door to darken it and
contained nothing but a thin blanket, and a bucket strong with chloride
of lime. In cases of this kind the captain signed the punishment order
which included bread and water. Every third day the prisoner got a pan
of beans. Most of them were so hungry they bolted the beans without
stopping to chew them and a few dungeon sentences brought on stomach
troubles that added to their misery.

My eight-year sentence was considered a short one at Folsom. I found
nine hundred prisoners there whose sentences averaged twelve years. They
were all hopeless. The parole law was a dead letter, inoperative. Only
at Christmas or on the Fourth of July did any one get a parole. The
place was a seething volcano of hatred and suspicion. Dirty Dick had in
the twenty years he was there developed a perfect stool-pigeon system. A
visiting warden, surprised because there was no wall around Folsom,
asked Murphy how he managed to keep the “cons” there. “That’s simple,”
he said. “I’ve got one half of them watching the other half.” His system
caused many murders and assaults and at last it climaxed in the
bloodiest prison break in the history of California.

Opium was the medium of exchange in the prison.  About three hundred men
used it habitually and a hundred more, occasionally. Incoming prisoners
smuggled money in and we bribed the poorly paid guards to buy hop at
Sacramento. No prisoner was allowed to buy anything through the office.
The trusties stole every movable article they could from the guards’ and
warden’s quarters and peddled them to us in the prison for their rations
of hop. The “cons” were divided roughly into three groups. One group
played the officers’ game, working in the offices or holding down other
soft jobs where they could loaf about the place and spy and snitch on
the others. Murphy rewarded them all. He gave the best snitches the
biggest beefsteaks. Another and larger group openly antagonized the
officers, engineering hop deals, planning the murder of stool pigeons,
and promoting escapes.

Between these two groups was a small bunch of convicts who did not
handle hop or curry favor with the officers. They were the best
conducted prisoners there, yet they were ground to pieces by the two
stronger factions. They got fag ends of food in the convict mess and
wore the patched-up clothes of the others.

I had some thought of getting off the hop when I got to Folsom and of
keeping my nose clean and trying to shorten my time by making a parole.
But I saw quickly all that was impossible for me and that I would be
lucky if I earned my credits. I joined the schemers and soon had my
share of the opium which meant power and influence. We sold the hop to
those who had money and with the money we bought more. Also we paid
guards to smuggle in sugar, butter, and other food.

Conditions at San Quentin were the same. Martin Aguirre became warden
there under Governor Gage.  Aguirre introduced the strait-jacket
punishment and I have been told he did it on the suggestion of a
convict.  This brutal and inhuman form of torture had been condemned in
English prisons years before as dangerous to life and limb. Yet this man
was permitted to revive it in California and its use was continued until
Hiram Johnson became governor.

Let it be said to this humane and enlightened gentleman’s everlasting
credit that one of his first official acts was to banish the jacket and
other brutalities from California prisons forever. Captain Murphy
welcomed the jacket as something superior to anything he had at Folsom
in the way of punishment. Up to that time the prisoners were “regulated”
by long terms in the dungeons on bread and water, loss of credits, or by
hanging them up by the wrists till they were on tiptoe.  When Dirty Dick
saw what could be done with the jacket he came into the stoneyard and
declared himself openly, “I’ve got something now that will make you
tough birds snitch on yourselves.”

The killing and maiming of convicts in the strait-jackets are matters of
record and too well known to call for any notice in this story. At
Folsom I saw the jacket making beasts of the convicts and brutes of
their keepers. I saw Jakey Oppenheimer transformed from a
well-intentioned prisoner into a murder maniac whose wanton killings and
assaults in prison brought him “under the rope” in the end. I saw the
convicts throw their hats in the air and shout for joy when Warden
Charles Aull died.

Thomas Wilkinson followed him as warden.

The tasks were increased, the food rations cut, and even the convict
stripes were made thinner and cheaper.  These abuses, coupled with
brutal strait-jacketings for the slightest infraction of rules,
crystallized all the hatred, despair, and hopelessness in the prison.
All the convicts needed was an organizer, a leader. He appeared in the
person of Dick Gordon. With a sentence of forty-five years and a prior
prison experience, Gordon saw no chance of getting out on the square and
began planning to escape. He was young—about twenty-three—modest,
kindly, intelligent. He came to Folsom with a reputation for doing
things on the outside and for being on the square. With great care and
diplomacy he sorted out a dozen men and his plan was laid down for the
getaway. It was simple and direct. Every Monday morning there were at
least a dozen officers and guards at the prison office.

The warden was always there to get everything under way; the captain to
try all prisoners for offenses committed between Saturday evening and
Monday morning; the overseer to plan the week’s work; the commissary to
give out clothing, and the turnkey to listen to requests for changing of
cells. This meant there were always thirty or forty prisoners at the
office.

The plan was for Gordon and his men to mingle with others at the
captain’s office. When the signal was given they were to rush the
officers, who were unarmed, put a knife at the throat of every one, and
march them all out through the guard line, using them as shields against
the gatling-gun fire from guard towers that encircled the prison. For
once Captain Murphy’s carefully built-up system of spying failed him; it
toppled on him, crushed him, and brought about his dismissal from the
prison.

His spies, when things were dull, often fabricated plots and stories to
hold their jobs. Sunday, before the break, they reported to Murphy that
something was brewing in the prison. He ordered fifty suspected men
searched but nothing was found. The knives Gordon and his men were to
use were being carried about by a “harmless” short-time convict, who
kept by himself and was not suspected.

Murphy, finding nothing wrong after the search, put the reports down to
over-zealousness by his stool pigeons and forgot them.

The next morning the knives were distributed and the dozen men dropped
out of the line at the captain’s office as the men went out to work.
Every officer in the prison except the doctor was captured.

The only guard that resisted was killed instantly, cut to pieces. The
only officer that resisted was Cochrane, the turnkey, the man who
personally laced up the strait-jacket victims. He was hated bitterly and
every man that got near enough put a knife into him.  He was cut a dozen
times and left for dead. He recovered, and later took his grudge out by
brutalities to prisoners who had never harmed him.

Gordon and his men marched their captives to the prison armory. Under
threat of death the warden ordered the guard in charge to open it.
Taking all the arms and ammunition they could carry they destroyed the
balance and still using the officers as shields marched them off the
prison grounds and into the woods. Here some of the escapes demanded
Dirty Dick’s life for the things he had done to them, but Gordon had his
way. “No murder” was his order and he enforced it. At sundown the
captives were released. The escapes scattered. Gordon went his way alone
and, though hunted for years, was never taken.

Five others of the twelve are still at liberty. The other six were
captured here and there. Three of them were hanged, and the remaining
three sentenced to life imprisonment, paroled after many years, and are
living within the law.

When things cooled down the people of California wanted to know how men
could be driven to such desperation that they captured and cut down
officers and guards, rushed and took a gatling-gun tower with nothing
but crude knives made in the prison blacksmith shop. This bloody affair
called attention to the terrible conditions and proved the beginning of
the end of prison cruelty in California.

After the break Folsom was a hell. The warden and Captain Murphy began
taking revenge on friends of the escapes. We were brought into the
office and questioned. I answered all questions respectfully, disclaimed
any knowledge of the break, and avoided punishment at that time. Warden
Wilkinson was removed and Archibald Yell of Sacramento took his place.
He had no experience and was forced to feel his way slowly. He had to
depend on Murphy. This put him in virtual control of the convicts and
his lust for revenge went unchecked. I was on his list and he soon got
me. I had but three months to serve when I was slated for the
strait-jacket. I knew the captain wanted to get my credits, which
amounted to two years and eight months. Murphy had me brought into his
office, where he said he had information that I was holding opium. If I
had admitted this they could have taken away my entire good time. I
denied it.

“Take him to the doctor,” the captain ordered.  That meant I was to be
examined as to my physical condition before they put me in the jacket.
This worried me; I was not sure whether I would snitch on myself and
give up the hop. Some stanch men had weakened in the jacket. I thought I
could stick it out and made up my mind to. I had been flogged and
starved and third-degreed before going to Folsom and had taken them all
with a grin, but I was not sure of myself in the jacket. Many prisoners
claimed they gave up information on themselves and friends while
delirious or semiconscious in the jacket, and that was what alarmed me.
I preferred death to the loss of my credits.

While waiting for the doctor I got word to a friend who was holding my
hop to throw it in the canal at once. In this way I figured I was
protecting my credits even from myself. The doctor OK-ed me and I was
taken into the dungeon, where Cochrane, now recovered from his terrible
wounds, was waiting with the jacket. I saw it was a piece of heavy
canvas about four feet long and wide enough to go around a man’s body.
There were long pockets sewed to the inner side of it into which my arms
were thrust. I was then thrown on the floor face down and the jacket was
laced up the back. The edges of the jacket were fitted with eyeholes and
the thing was tightened up with a soft, stout rope just as a lady’s shoe
is laced. It can be drawn tight enough to stop the circulation of blood,
or the breath.

While Cochrane was tightening the jacket he said: “You fellows tried to
kill me; now it’s my time.” When he had me squeezed tight enough he
turned me over on my back and went to the cell door. “When you’re ready
to snitch on yourself, Blacky, just sing out,” he said as he locked me
in.

I will not harrow the reader with a description of the torture. The
jacket is no longer in use and no purpose would be served by living over
those three days in the “bag.” Every hour Cochrane came in and asked if
I was ready to give up the hop. When I denied having it, he tightened me
up some more and went away. The torture became maddening. Some time
during the second day I rolled over to the wall and beat my forehead
against it trying to knock myself “out.” Cochrane came in, saw what I
was doing, and dragged me back to the middle of the cell. I hadn’t
strength enough left to roll back to the wall, so I stayed there and
suffered. A guard looked in and there was real sympathy in his voice. He
said: “Why don’t you scream, make a noise? They might let you out; they
don’t want to kill anybody any more.” I didn’t want my friends to hear
me screaming; I kept still. It wouldn’t have done any good, anyway.

On the evening of the second day the doctor came and felt the pulse in
my temple. He then ordered me taken out for the night. They took the
thing off and I collapsed in one corner. There was a wooden cup of water
on the cell floor and I took a small mouthful only, because it would
make the jacket so much worse when I was put back in it. My fear of
snitching was gone now. The very ferocity of the punishment had made me
a wild beast.

I crawled around the cell looking for something I could use to open a
vein or artery; I wanted to die. All I found was my shoes. I tried to
dig a nail out of one of the heels, but only broke my finger nails. At
last I loosened one of the small metal eyes where the shoe is laced and
with the heel of my shoe beat it out flat on the cement floor. After
rubbing the metal on the floor for an hour I got an edge on it sharp
enough to open the skin but it would not cut the vein. Every time I
touched the vein it jumped out from under my crude blade. The sensation
was something like touching a live wire, like an electric shock. Finally
I gave it up and lay down to wait for morning.

I had an opium habit, but suffered so from the jacket that I forgot all
about the hop—another proof to me that the habit is mostly mental.

Cochrane came at eight o’clock the next morning.  I denied having hop
and out came the jacket. All that day I was only half conscious, dopey.
I don’t think I suffered as much as on the previous day. Some time in
the night they released me, and I lay on the floor in a stupor. I don’t
know how long. Toward morning my mind cleared and I felt that another
day would finish me. I decided I would send for Captain Murphy after
they put me back in the jacket and ask him to take me down to the bank
of the canal where I worked so I could dig up the hop from its plant and
give it to him. I was liked by the “cons” and knew he would go with me
personally, so my friends could see him triumphing over me. At the
canal, instead of giving him hop I intended to throw my arms around him
and drag him to the bottom, where we would both “cease from troubling.”

The fourth morning Cochrane said: “You’re a damn fool; better give up
your hop. You can’t finish out the day.” I waited for him to put me in.
He held up the “bag” in front of me. I was sitting on the floor. “Get
up,” he said. I didn’t; I couldn’t; I was too weak.  With a gesture of
disgust he threw the jacket out the door into the corridor. Motioning to
a couple of trusty prisoners, he said: “Take him away.” They helped me
to my cell and into my bunk. I lay there half dead, but victorious. My
cellmate came at noon and slipped me a jolt of hop. I took it and felt
better.  He had not even thrown it away as I asked. “I knew you wouldn’t
squawk,” he said, “so I held on to it.”

My three months passed quickly enough and I was released, still feeling
the effects of the jacket. When I got out I held up my hand and swore I
would never make another friend or do another decent thing. I borrowed a
gun and got money. I returned to Folsom by stealth and flooded the place
with hop. I went about the country for months with but one thing in my
mind, a sort of vicious hatred of everybody and everything. As much as
possible I shunned even my own kind—thieves.

Then back to San Francisco again where I fell into a stool-pigeon trap.
Captain “Steve” Bunner, who now chases policemen, was then a very plain,
plain-clothes “dick,” chasing burglars and stick-ups. He arrested me. He
says I tried to shoot him but that he bears me no malice. I say he got
me a twenty-five year sentence, and I bear him no malice; and to-day,
while we are not exactly bosom friends, we certainly are not enemies. I
had no money to take an appeal from this stiff sentence, but an
attorney came and volunteered his services, saying: “I was in the
district attorney’s office when you were sent to Folsom and I know you
got jobbed. I’ll take your case for nothing.”

While waiting on appeal the great earthquake and fire occurred. All the
records in my case were destroyed. I could not be sent to prison, and
the attorney could not get me out, so I became a permanent fixture in
the county jail.

The old Broadway county jail was a stout structure and resisted the
quake, but was fire-swept and abandoned. When the fire threatened, all
prisoners were removed to Alcatraz Island and later to the branch jail
at Ingleside. I was there over six years and the things that happened
there during that time would fill a book.

During the graft prosecution that followed the fire, Ingleside housed
the mayor, the political boss of San Francisco, and many of the
supervisors. A looting banker was there, many strikebreakers indicted
for the murder of union men during the car strike, and soldiers for
wantonly shooting down citizens while the city burned. Jack Johnson,
the colored heavyweight champion, was with us for thirty days for
speeding.

Money was plentiful in the jail. The grocer came every day, and we all
got enough to eat. The political boss bought many books and founded a
library. He also got a big phonograph that was kept going all day and
far into the night. I was “appointed” jail librarian, and at once
catalogued the books and installed them in an empty cell.

The jail was a cross between a political headquarters and an industrial
plant. The political prisoners did politics, and the prisoners whose
records were burned in the fire turned to industry.

We got contracts to address envelopes and sublet the work to others. We
sewed beads on “genuine” Indian moccasins for a concern downtown. Best
of all, we bought cheap jewelry from mail-order houses and sold it at a
profit to visitors, giving them to understand that it was stolen stuff
we had smuggled in with us.

One by one, those whose records were destroyed by the fire made
application to have them restored in order to perfect their appeals. In
the reconstruction of those records they lost their valuable points on
appeal and one by one they were turned down by the higher court. I made
no move, but decided to stay in the jail rather than go back to Folsom,
although conditions there had been greatly improved by Warden Yell, who
soon put Captain Murphy out and won the confidence of the convicts by
treating them on the square.

At last a visiting grand-jury committee reported to the district
attorney that there was a prisoner at Ingleside whose case had been
pending more than six years, and recommended that something be done with
it. He at once put me on the docket for restoration of records.

My attorney had retired, and with money I had saved from work and
speculations in jail I got a new lawyer. I had all the criminal lawyers
in San Francisco doped out like race horses by this time, and my choice
was Sam Newburgh. I had seen him beat some of the toughest cases that
ever went to trial. Not only that, I had seen him go down in his pocket
and give clients money after he got them out. He never weakened, never
lay down, or ran out on a man—money or no money.

Newburgh at once threw down a most formidable barrage of objections and
technicalities. The prosecution got busy and, as usual, the defendant
was lost sight of in the smoke of battle. I had little hope of actually
beating the case; the best I could expect was a new trial and maybe a
sentence I could do instead of one that would do me.

But while my affairs were at this stage a new hope appeared. I had made
a few new outside friends by this time. One of them especially, a fine,
noble woman, who was interested in helping us all, concerned herself to
do what she could for me.

About this time Fremont Older, now editor of *The Call*, had helped the
late Donald Lowrie, whose writings did for American prisons what John
Howard’s did for those of England.

This woman, who was one of Mr. Older’s friends, wrote him and said:

“By way of thanking you for helping Lowrie I am going to give you
another man to assist. He is John Black, at the Ingleside jail. I wish
you would see him.”

He called at the jail soon, but instead of having me out to the office
he came down to my cell, squeezed his bulk through the doorway, and sat
down on the edge of my bunk. Waving the guard away, he produced cigars,
helped me to a light, and asked, in a voice that rang to me like a
twenty-dollar piece, what he could do for me. For once all my mistrust,
suspicion, and hatred vanished.

I said: “Mr. Older, I’m afraid you will waste a lot of valuable time
trying to do anything for me.  I have twenty-five years. I’m guilty. I’m
plastered over with prior convictions. The police hate me, the jailers
dislike me because I tried to escape, and the trial judge is sore
because I’ve done everything possible to obstruct the judgment.”

I told him I was a hop fiend, that I had used it for ten years, and was
still using it. I told him I was tired of stealing and tired of living.
I told him there was but one thing I could say for myself. I had never
broken my word either to a thief or a policeman. I told him if he did
help me out I would give him my word to quit stealing. He went away,
saying: “This looks pretty tough, but I will try.”

He at once saw Judge Dunne, who sentenced me, and suggested probation on
the ground of my long confinement and dangerous physical condition.

Mr. Older was the powerful editor of a newspaper and a long-time friend
of the judge. He was stared at as if he had gone mad, and his suggestion
met with a cold, flat, final turndown. He sent word to me that the judge
was adamant and nothing could be done.  I saw my case was tough indeed
when he couldn’t help me, and began planning a getaway.

I will not say there is honor among thieves. But I maintain that the
thieves I knew had something that served as a good substitute for honor.
I thought over all my thief friends and at last chose one and sent for
him. He got me saws, and I cut bars in my door.

On a propitious night he cut the window bars. I was too weak to pull
myself up to the window, and he had to reach in, lift me bodily, and
drop me on the ground outside.

Strange as it may sound, the fresh, cool night air had the same effect
on me that the foul air of a sewer would have on a healthy, normal
human. It overcame me. I was not able to walk at first, and my rescuer
had to support me on our way to the car line.

Before daylight and before the escape was discovered I was safely
planted in a room in Oakland, where I stayed and was nursed back to
life, fed and protected by my friend.

After waiting for a couple of weeks for the hue and cry to subside, he
stowed me away in a sleeper one night at Richmond on a northbound train
with a ticket to Vancouver, B.C.

County constables and town whittlers beat up the jungles, searched box
cars and brakebeams; city dicks explored the hop joints and hangouts for
me and the reward offered, but I traveled safely as a first-class
passenger on a first-class train.

No police officer who knows his business would think of looking in a
Pullman sleeper or diner for a fugitive hop fiend yegg with a
twenty-five-year sentence hanging on him.

Arriving safely at Vancouver, I took stock and found myself sick,
weighing one hundred and ten pounds, with a ferocious hop habit, about
ten dollars, and a big pistol—the gatherings of forty years.

Then came a foggy night. Necessity and Opportunity met, and I went away
with a bundle of bank notes and some certified checks. The checks went
into the first mail box as an apology from Necessity to Opportunity.

Then began the toughest battle of my life. Opium, the Judas of drugs,
that kisses and betrays, had a good grip on me, and I prepared to break
it. The last words of my rescuer when he put me in the train rang in my
ears:

“Good-by and good luck, Blacky. And you’d better lay away from that hop
or it’ll make a bum of you.”




CHAPTER XXIV


I had money enough to last some little time, long enough to get my
strength back, perhaps. I paid the landlady a month’s rent and told her
I was a sick man and would be in my room all the time and not to disturb
me.

In this way I hoped to account for never stirring out of doors, which I
did not dare do. I certainly was a sick man, and looked it.

This landlady was very good-hearted, and, sympathizing with my illness,
she did not leave me alone two hours in succession. She sent a Chinese
boy every hour or two to see how I felt, and in the morning she would
send in coffee and toast and come in herself to inquire how I was.

After the boy had made the bed in the morning, she must come in to see
if he had turned the mattress and shaken up the pillows for me. She was
so busy helping me out that she nearly landed me back in jail.

I came back to my room from the bathroom one morning, and there she
stood staring at a gun I had been keeping under the mattress. She had
insisted on turning the mattress herself and found it. She was standing
there staring at it like she would at a rattlesnake, and asked me what I
was doing with that “awful thing.”

I sat down and said to her: “Mrs. Alexander, I bought that pistol to
kill myself with in case I get physically disabled. You see, I’m a sick
man. I told you I was a sick man, and I have a suspicion I am a
consumptive. I don’t want to go to doctors and I’m going to let this
thing run its course, but if I find I am down and out and done for I’m
going to shoot myself.  That’s what I have it for.”

She was all upset with sympathy. She said: “You’re no consumptive. You
are only run down. You’ll be all right in a few months, with good food
and care.  Let me keep this thing. I’ll take it and keep it. Don’t get
downhearted, you’ll be all right.”

Of course I had to let her take it. That night I went out and bought
another one. I also bought a bag and a few clothes, and I was careful
after that to lock the new pistol up in the bag when she was around.

So I settled down to fight it out with my opium habit, at the same time
keeping on the watch all the time for the police.

I had been using opium steadily for ten years. For ten years I had never
gone to sleep without taking it.  I owed to it all the sleep, all the
rest and forgetfulness and contentment I had had in that time.

Now I made up my mind to quit. Right away I found I had to pay back
every second of sleep, every quiet, restful moment I had got from the
opium in the whole ten years.

I was taking about five grains a day. I began to taper down slowly. I
cut off a grain a week at the start, then for a couple of months I took
only three grains a day.

It would have been a good deal harder to quit if I hadn’t had that fear
of the jail always before me.  That took my mind off the opium. The
worst hold the drug gets on a man is the mental hold. It becomes a
mental habit. A man has to keep a hard grip on his mind; he has to want
to quit, first, and keep wanting to quit all the time, then he can do
it.

I could stick the daytime out. I found something to do; I read, or ate,
or walked around the room. I did not dare go out in the daytime, for
fear I would be recognized by the police or by some stool pigeon.  This
worry was always on my mind, and in a way it helped, because while I was
thinking of that I was not thinking about the opium.

It was the small, still hours of the night that got me. I had to get
some sleep and strength for the next day. Every particle of opium I cut
off my daily dose cut off just that much sleep. For years in the jail I
had slept away all the time I could; I had slept ten or twelve or
fourteen hours a day. Now I had to pay back all that sleep I had stolen
from myself.

I put in twenty-three hours a day waiting for the twenty-fourth, when I
could take my little jolt of hop.  Every day when the hour arrived I was
tempted to take one more good jolt, so that I could have a decent
night’s sleep and forget everything for a few hours.

But the last words of my friend who had rescued me were always in my
ears. “Lay away from that stuff. It will make a bum of you.”

Hundreds of times it was just that memory that tipped the balance, and I
would take only what I had allowed myself, no more. I believe now I quit
because he said that to me. I felt that if I could not do that much, and
it was the only thing he ever asked me to do, I wasn’t worthy of the
friendship of such a man as he had shown himself to be.

Then I would go to bed and try to sleep. After several hours I would get
up and go out for a walk, to get some exercise. I would walk as fast as
I could for three or four hours in the darkness, always keeping watch
for a policeman or for any one who knew me.

I would walk until I was tired out, because I was still pretty weak, and
it did not take much to tire me.  Then I would hope to sleep a little.

But in the long, still hours my nerves demanded opium. And I resisted
and fought it out till my strength got down to the vanishing point.

Then I would get up and drench myself with whisky and wash it down with
absinth. My room looked like a cross between a drug store and a
distillery. I had bottles of tonics, invalid’s port wine, whisky and
absinth.

I would take a drink out of every bottle in the room and fall down on
the bed or on the floor in a stupor and sleep for a few hours.

In this manner I stuck it out. I took a small portion of hop each
evening, reducing it daily according to the system I planned. Finally I
got to the stage where I could skip one day’s portion and get two hours’
natural sleep.

Then I tried skipping two days and got by with it, but on the third day
I was tied in a knot with cramps and aches and nothing but hop would put
me on my feet.

All this time Mrs. Alexander, my kindly landlady, was urging me to go
out in the sunshine during the day. She said it would do me good to get
more air, and she could see no reason why I wouldn’t do it.

So at last I went out one afternoon.

I went to a little park where it was quiet and lay on the grass. It was
so good to touch and smell the grass again that I couldn’t get enough of
it. It seemed to me that grass was the most beautiful thing in the
world. I felt as though I could eat it.

I lay there in the sunshine and ran my hands through it and pulled a
blade or two and chewed it.  I had not been in the sunshine nor been
able to touch anything green and growing for over six years.  I wouldn’t
have spoiled that lawn, put a cigarette stub or an orange peel on it for
anything in the world.

After that I went out three or four afternoons a week and lay on that
grass in the park. I could feel that I was getting stronger, I could eat
with good appetite, and every night I decreased the opium according to
my schedule. I finally got the dose down to an eighth of a grain.

Even that amount, even the smallest particle that I could get on the end
of a toothpick, would make the difference between sleeping all night or
not.

I don’t believe in those radical cures. It stands to reason you can’t
cure in three days a habit that it took you five or ten years to build
up. I think any man can cure himself. He must first be cured mentally,
he must *want* to be cured. If he doesn’t want to be cured, all the
treatments in the world aren’t going to do it. You can lock men in
prisons and deprive them of hop, and they will come right back and get
it again because they don’t want to be cured. But the man who *wants* to
quit can.

It took me six months to get the dose down to nothing. Even then for
months more the thing might jump out at me at any minute, like a wild
beast and tear me to pieces. I would go half crazy for the time, I would
be mad to get hold of some hop. But that would last only a few hours,
and every time I got through it safe I knew it would be easier next
time.

Every minute I was out of the house in the daytime I kept watching for
people who knew me. A good many men had been through Ingleside jail in
the six years I was there and Vancouver was full of them.  None of them
ever saw me, because I saw them first.  I tried to see every man in the
block ahead of me the minute I stepped on the curb.

Cured of the habit now, I went back “on the road,” determined to stay in
Canada, keep away from big cities and wise coppers, and try to do the
twenty-five-year sentence outside instead of at Folsom. I traveled east
over the Canadian Pacific Railway to the booming province of Alberta.
One morning after an all-night ride, I crawled out of a box car in the
town of Strathcona, tired, hungry, and dirty. I was not in distress for
money, and looked around for a quiet place where I could lay off for a
week and rest up. After a breakfast, a bath, and a shave, I walked
around a while and located a quiet, respectable-looking place with a
“board and rooms” sign. It looked to be a half-private, out-of-the-way
place, so I went in.

A Chinese boy was dusting up in the lounging room, and I asked him for
the “boss man.” He disappeared out in the hall. In a few minutes I heard
a heavy step and turned around to face Salt Chunk Mary, the friend of
the bums and yeggs at Pocatello. More than fifteen years had passed
since she disappeared, yet I knew her instantly. The same, level “right
now” look from her cold blue eyes; the same severe parting of her
brick-red hair; the same careful, clean, starched house dress, and the
same few short, sharp, meaningful words told me it was she who had
broken open the town jail and set me free when no man would turn a hand.

“Oh, Mary!” I cried, and my hand went out to her.  I said something
about Pocatello and the night I saw her last, and about Foot-’n’-a-half
George, long dead, but she stopped me cold. Looking me straight in the
eye, she said in a tone of finality that left no chance of an answer:

“You are mistaken; you don’t know me. My name’s not Mary, and I was
never in Pocatello in my life.”

When Mary said no she meant it. I went out and away, envying that
courageous woman who had the strength to leave Pocatello and her life
there, and bury herself in a far corner of the North.

After much thought I decided that Salt Chunk Mary had washed her hands
of the old life and old associates and was trying to spend her remaining
days in peace. I saw her no more, and went my solitary way, pistoling
people away from their money—the highwayman’s way.

A distinguished chief of police in one of our big cities gave this
advice to the public:

“If a holdup man stops you, grab him and yell at the top of your voice.”

That was the advice of a policeman; more, the advice of a policeman who
was never stuck up. I know something about the stick-up game. I’ve been
stuck up myself. This is the first time I’ve told about it, and it will
be the last. I’m not advising any reader what to do in case of a
stick-up. I’m only telling what I did.

As I was walking home one mild midnight up Haight Street, a young man
came down the street toward me. He was whistling a little tune, his hat
was on the back of his head, and he walked briskly, swinging his arms.

“Ah, ha,” thinks I, “here’s a young fellow that’s just left his girl at
her door. She gave him a kiss, and he’s happy. He’s hurrying home now,
and—” my reflections ended. About ten feet away from me his arms swung
together and his right hand pulled a long gun out of his left sleeve.

“The real thing,” I said to myself, stopping.

“Put up your hands.”

I did.

“Turn your face to that fence.”

I did.

He stepped up behind me and put something hard against my spine.

“All right, brother,” I said meekly. “It’s all yours.  It’s in my
left-hand pants pocket.”

He found it.

“I’ve got a watch, brother, that’s worth a lot to me; I wish you’d let
me keep it. It would bring you four dollars, but it might bring you
forty years.”

“Huh!” he grunted. He felt for the watch, took it out of its pocket,
“hefted” it in his hand, and put it back. “You keep your face to that
fence till I get out of the block or I’ll ‘spray’ you with this
automatic.”

I did.

That’s the way I deal with a stick-up man.

There is no way I know of to protect yourself from the starving moron
who pounces on you out of a dark doorway, knocks you on the head with a
“blunt instrument,” and goes through your pockets after you are on the
sidewalk. That kind of “work” is unprofessional, unnatural, and
disgusting, and does not concern me. The psychiatrist might explain and
classify it; I cannot.

After circulating around with my pistol for a few months I was arrested
and, almost by chance, identified as a fugitive from California justice.
In short order I was brought back to San Francisco.

The first man that came to see me in the city prison was Sam Newburgh,
the attorney who had my case when I escaped from the jail.

Two days before I had escaped, the last fifty-dollar payment on his fee
had come due. At that time I was almost sure I would escape and get away
without any trouble, and I was tempted to defer this payment and put him
off until later, because I saw I would have use for the fifty dollars
myself.

But when he came out to the jail I paid it to him.

He remembered this, and when I was brought back he was the first man
there to see me. To my surprise and delight, he told me that my legal
status was just about the same as when I left. My appeal was still
pending.

I had some thoughts that Mr. Older might feel I had abused his
confidence in leaving the jail, when he was trying to do something for
me. But he knew at the time that I was turned down by every one and
didn’t have a chance of getting my liberty, so I hoped he would
understand.

He came immediately to see me, and I explained this to him. I said I
never would have made a move of that kind if there had been a chance;
that I had to do it in order to do myself justice. I said I knew I would
not live another two years in that jail; they had all admitted they
could do nothing for me, and I thought I had a right to do as I did.

He said, “I think you did the only thing. It was the only way out for
you. I would probably have done the same thing myself.”

He remarked that I was looking stronger and healthier. I had gained
about thirty pounds in weight. Mr. Older could see in a minute that I
had quit the opium. He spoke of it at once.

He said he would see if something could be done for me. He thought it
might be possible that the district attorney’s office, on account of all
the complications of the case, would agree to ask for an amended
sentence, a sentence of only a year or two, if I would stop fighting and
plead guilty.

I said: “If I had thought such a thing possible, Mr. Older, I’d have
paid my way back here and given myself up!”

I had little hope that any such thing would be done.  I had never
encountered anything like it. The next day Maxwell McNutt of the
district attorney’s office came in to talk to me.

He spoke about my escape, and I told him the reasons for it as I had
told the others. I explained that I would not have had to do it if my
friends had been able to do something for me in the way of a lighter
sentence.

He said that so far as the district attorney was concerned, he thought I
had served almost enough time. I was astounded when I heard this. In all
my experience I had never encountered a district attorney’s office that
thought any criminal had served enough time.

This was a revelation to me in the ways of courts and police. It was the
first time I ever got any better than the worst of it. I saw myself
relieved of that burden of a twenty-five-year sentence. I saw myself
coming out in a couple of years with the slate wiped clean.

I realized that Judge Dunne would be taking a chance in giving me a
sentence that amounted practically to nothing. He had his place on the
bench and his reputation with his fellow judges and the people to
consider. If I came out of prison and got into trouble immediately
after, I would be double-crossing him.

I saw it was up to me to square myself and go to work when I came out.

After some delay the district attorney and the trial judge agreed to
amend the judgment, and a day was set for me to go into court. Mr. Older
asked me to make a statement, hoping there might be something in my
experience that would throw some light on the criminal problem that
might help people to help criminals.

When I got into court I decided not to make this statement until after I
was sentenced, because I didn’t want any one to feel that what I said
was said for selfish reasons, and if I said it before I was sentenced it
might appear that I was talking for leniency.

I decided I had got all the leniency that was coming to me, and very
much more than I ever expected.

The judge sentenced me to one year. That was better than I had hoped
for. The district attorney had suggested it probably would not be more
than two years, but here the judge had cut even that in two.

As near as I can recall them, my words were as follows:

“I would like to make a statement before it is too late. I feel that
this will be my last appearance in any court as a defendant, and I want
to make this statement in the hope that there may be something in my
experience that will prove valuable to some one, perhaps some one in
authority who has to do with the instruction and correction of
offenders, particularly of the younger ones.

“I would not make this statement if I ever expected to appear in court
again as a defendant. As criminal as it is, I will consider it as
nothing if it prove of value to any one, if my failure would cause some
young man to hesitate before it is too late, before he finds himself
charged with crime.

“My prison experiences began with a sentence of two years and thirty
lashes in a Canadian prison. I could not see that I deserved this
flogging, and it seemed when I got it that all the cruelty in the world
was visited on me—all the brutality, all the violence.  There was a
lesson in cruelty I have never forgotten.  Fortunately, I had a
disposition that hardened with the flogging instead of breaking under
it.

“I proved an incorrigible prisoner while there. I broke the rules many,
many times in a small way—nothing violent, nothing desperate, but I
would talk, laugh, whistle and sing, and that outraged the silence of
the system then in vogue.

“I was punished repeatedly on bread and water, the dark cell. The warden
was a hard, stern man.  His motto was—‘break them first and make them
after.’

“Then came the day for the second installment of my flogging and my
discharge from prison. I went out with the skin on my back blistered and
broken and my mind bent on revenge. I went out of there with a hatred
for law and order, society and justice, discipline and restraint, and
everything that was orderly and systematic. I had a hatred for courts,
jailers, prison keepers, and wardens. I hated policemen, prosecutors,
judges and jurors.

“If I had reasoned right, I might have made a better start than I did.
But I had no experience to guide me. I planned for revenge and I turned
on society to get it, because society furnishes the judges, the jurors,
the policemen, the prosecutors. Before I got fairly started on my career
of revenge I was back in prison.

“When I went back I learned more brutality and violence. I knew the
bread-and-water punishment, the dark cell, the strait-jacket and the
water cure. I thought violent thoughts, I planned violent plans, and I
executed those plans as best I could as soon as I got outside. I suppose
a man’s actions are the creatures of his thought, and his thoughts are
naturally the products of his environment and the conditions under which
he is forced to live.

“If you put a boy in prison at the age I was, as prisons were then, he
will become a criminal as sure as the day follows the night or the night
follows the day. I imagine those conditions were responsible for many
criminals of my age or thereabouts, who were considered incorrigible. I
won’t say confirmed, because I believe there is no such thing as a
confirmed criminal. I have seen many miraculous reformations.  One man
may be reformed through a woman, a woman’s plea, a mother’s love. Others
might be reformed through the assistance and kindness of friends. But
still another might be reformed by an act of kindness from some
unexpected source. I believe that one who has been brutalized can be
turned right by an act of kindness and be regenerated. It looks
reasonable.

“When I stood up in this court to be sentenced for twenty-five years, I
was a criminal, as I have described.  I had learned the lesson of
violence in prison, and I believed that I lived in a world of violence,
had to use violence, and use it first. I had no more thought of right or
wrong than a wolf that prowls the prairie.  I hunted because I was
hunted myself, and I showed no consideration for anybody or anything
because I knew I would receive none.

“I was a habitual criminal. I had formed the criminal habit. Habit is
the strongest thing in life, and criminals such as I have described obey
the impulse to commit a crime almost subconsciously. So far as the right
or wrong is concerned, he gives it no more thought than you would when
you walk down the street and open the gate to enter your front door. It
is a habit with you.

“The twenty-five-year sentence I received made no impression on me
whatever. I expected it, and had expected it for years. It was simply an
incident, an obstacle, another delay—a violent one, to be sure; but I
had dealt the game of violence, and when forced to play at it I am not
the one to complain.

“So I went back to the county jail and my lawyer went back to his law.
Then came the fire that destroyed the records of my conviction and
sentence, and put me in the perpetual criminal class at the county jail.
I became more permanent than the sheriff. I saw them come and go, and
after years of comparative peace and quiet and fair treatment in the
county jail I began to change my views and think different thoughts, and
I looked forward to a different sort of life.

“A few friends rallied around and began to plan ways and means to help
me. They investigated, found it impossible, and told me.

“The future looked dark, and I was in despair.  The day of my
deliverance seemed to be receding instead of advancing. I planned to get
my liberty in another way, and I did get it, but I got it under such
circumstances as to make it impossible for me to lead the life I had
planned.

“It was impossible for me to mix with men in the daytime. I was a
fugitive. I was hunted again. I had to seek the back streets on the
darkest nights.

“In a few months I found myself back in jail in San Francisco. Then
something occurred that surprised me more than I can tell. I was told
that there was a possibility of my getting credit for the time that I
had served in the county jail, that I might get a sentence I would see
the end of, instead of one that would see the end of me, and that it
might be possible for me to get out and lead a different kind of life.

“This made a greater impression upon me than the twenty-five-year
sentence, this offer of help from such a surprising source. At first I
thought I was getting the double-cross, but I investigated and found it
was true, and what little doubts I had were completely shattered. I did
not admit the possibility of any kindness from judges, district
attorneys, prosecutors, or anybody who represents the people.

“I now saw that I was wrong, and that it was up to me to build new rules
to regulate my conduct in the future, that I would have to formulate a
philosophy that would admit the possibility of kindness from such
sources; from people who desired to help me if I would help myself.

“I have promised myself, and I promise the court, that when I finish
this sentence I shall look for the best instead of the worst, that I
shall look for kindness instead of cruelty, and that I shall look for
the good instead of the bad, and when I find them I shall return them
with interest.

“I am confident when I promise the court this that I will not fail. I
imagine I have enough character left as a foundation on which to build a
reformed life.  If I had no character, no will power, no determination,
I would have been broken long ago by the years of imprisonment and
punishment; and I would have been useless and harmless and helpless, a
force for neither good nor bad.”

Judge Dunne asked me if I had any choice of prisons, and I said I
preferred San Quentin because I had already been in every other prison
in the state, and I would like to go over there and see what that place
was like.

I left the courtroom with that one-year sentence feeling as if I had
received a Christmas gift; it was the twenty-fourth of December.

At San Quentin I had a hard time to convince friends that my sentence
was cut to one year. The atmosphere there surprised me. There was none
of that smoldering hatred of officers; no hopeless, despairing
prisoners; no opium and no scheming to get it in. Everybody was looking
forward to parole.  There was no brutal punishment. A man’s credits were
safe. All those changes worked for the best.  Prisoners had a chance to
shorten their time by good conduct, and their conduct was good.

One of the first “cons” to reach me was my friend, Soldier Johnnie,
doing a short sentence.

I hadn’t seen him since leaving the Canadian prison, where I got the
dark cell for speaking to him. We were comparing notes for a week. It
was from him I learned that the Sanctimonious Kid had escaped from Canon
City before finishing his fifteen years, and that he had gone to
Australia, where he was hanged for killing a police constable. In turn,
I told him of Foot-’n’-a-half George’s death, and of Mary’s
disappearance into the Far North.

Johnnie finished his time first, and went back to the road, where he
probably will live out his life and die unwept, unhonored, and unhung.

I put in my sentence without any trouble and came out in ten months.
That was thirteen years ago.

On the boat for San Francisco I saw the bar. At once I felt that I
needed a jolt of booze. I got it.

Then I saw the lunch counter. I at once felt the need of a cup of real
coffee. I got that. After that, I sat down on a bench and thought it
over.

Here I was, physically fit and serviceably sound, walking up to that bar
and buying a drink of whisky I didn’t need just because I happened to
see the bar, and then a cup of coffee just because I saw the coffee urn.

I decided I would have to beware of the power of suggestion. The bar had
suggested whisky and the lunch counter coffee, and I fell for them both.

Anyway, I made up my mind that I would close my eyes when I got to the
ferry building for fear I might see a sack of registered mail lying
around loose.  It would suggest days of ease and nights of pleasure, and
I might fall for that.

I got through the ferry building and walked up Market Street, as they
all do. In time I found myself in Mr. Older’s anteroom. There were
several men waiting to see him. I looked them over and said to myself,
“There’s preachers, politicians, and pickpockets in that bunch. I’ll be
lucky if I don’t have to wait an hour.”

The young lady took my name and I was the first one in. Mr. Older was
there with a suggestion, too; luncheon at the Palace Hotel.

I’m not strong for eating in swell places, but I do like quick
contrasts. I had my breakfast in San Quentin, so why not lunch at the
Palace?

We had a good meal. While we were eating, Mr.  Older suggested that I
come down to his ranch for a few days, till I got my bearings again in
the outside world and was ready to begin work.

I was glad to do this. It helped get me over the hardest part of the
life of the ex-prisoner who intends to go square; the first few weeks
out of prison. I went down that night for a week and stayed six months.

I would have been content to stay there always. I was able to do enough
on the ranch to pay for my board and shelter, and I liked it. But it was
necessary after a while for me to come back to San Francisco and go to
work. My room was wanted on the ranch by other men who needed it worse
than I did.

Eddie Graney needs no introduction here. I only hope this story has as
many readers as he has friends.  While he is known and respected for his
square decisions as a referee of big fights, I think his fame rests
chiefly on the fact that while he has the finest billiard rooms west
of—oh, well, west of anywhere—he has not yet learned how to play
billiards.

Graney gave me my first job—cashier in his pool room—handling his money.
After a few months a better job appeared. With a letter of introduction
I saw Mr. B. F. Schlesinger of the Emporium.

“Where did you work last?” he asked.

“At Eddie Graney’s.”

“And before that?”

“At San Quentin, in the jute mill.”

He knew all about me and put me to work as salesman in the book
department. I knew something about books—I had been librarian at the
county jail. I was honest—hadn’t stolen any of Graney’s money. I felt
perfectly at ease among the books, and made good.  Book selling grew
dull later, and I was slated for a transfer to another department. At
the manager’s office I was told that the only vacancy was on the ribbon
counter. I looked in a mirror on the wall and saw a face in it that
didn’t seem to belong behind the ribbon counter.

I said: “Mr. Schlesinger, this is a great life if you know when to
weaken. I think this is where I’ll weaken.”

At lunch time I saw Mr. Older and told him about it. Fortunately, there
was a vacancy at the *Bulletin* in the circulation department just then
and I got the job. I left the Emporium with the best wishes and good
will of everybody I met there. When Mr. Older became editor of *The
Call* he found a place there for me as librarian; I still have that job.

In thirteen years I have learned to work—some day I may learn to like
it. Yet it is so easy and simple and safe and secure that I now wonder
how any man coming out of prison could think of doing anything else.
The pity of it is that so many ex-prisoners who do think of trying to
work can’t get it. I take no credit whatever for going to work. I could
have done that years before.

I quit stealing and learned working because I was in a hole where I
could not do otherwise. I was in hock to friends who saved me from a
heavy sentence, provided me with work, and expected only that I stay out
of jail. That’s not asking much of a man—to keep out of jail. The judge
who cut my sentence took a greater chance than I ever did. If I had gone
back “sticking up” people, the judge’s critics could have said that he,
and he alone, made it possible—and that’s precisely why I quit.

If I had stolen Graney’s, the Emporium’s, or the *Bulletin’s* money,
they could have said that Older made it possible, and had I been tempted
to steal that thought would have stopped me. I cannot say I quit
stealing because I knew it was wrong. I quit because there was no other
way for me to discharge the obligations I had accepted. Whatever measure
of reformation I have won is directly due to Fremont Older and Judge
Dunne of the Superior Court. They took a chance on me, a long chance,
and it will be a long time before they regret it. Fremont Older has been
a rock in a weary land to me, and Judge Dunne has been a shelter in the
time of storm.

It has been easy for me. The noble woman who found me rotting in jail
physically and mentally is still my friend, I am proud to say. The
kindly Christian couple who gave me a home with them in San Francisco
and treated me as a son are still my friends.  Friends everywhere, to
help and advise and encourage.  Even friends from the road and the
jungles drop into my office and shake hands and say: “More power to you,
old-timer. You’re sure makin’ good. I’m goin’ to try it myself some
day.”

My feuds with the police are dead and buried. No copper has bothered me
or obstructed me. Many of them have offered in good faith to help me.
And so I say it has been easy for me to go on the square. I speak only
of my own experience; others may not have been so fortunate in finding
friends.

I wish I could sift out a few grains of wisdom from my life that would
help people to help prisoners, and help prisoners to help themselves,
but I can’t find them.  I don’t know. All I can say with certainty is
that kindness begets kindness, and cruelty begets cruelty.  You can make
your choice and reap as you sow.

I am not worrying about prisons. If they improve as much in the coming
twenty years as they have in the last twenty, they will have to be
called something else. While the number of convicts is increasing, the
percentage of second and third timers, habitual criminals, is
decreasing. That’s hopeful, and it’s because of more humane treatment,
more liberal parole laws, and the extension of road building and other
work, that fits a prisoner for the outside, gives him the work habit.

Highway building by convicts is the sanest and most constructive step I
have seen. Instead of appropriating money to build a third prison in
California, the same money might be expended in road-building materials,
and one of our two prisons emptied into the road camps, where the
prisoner could be self-supporting and not a dead weight on the taxpayer
while in prison, and worse after he gets out.

A certain number of prisoners, say ten per cent, always have and always
will abuse probation and parole. The ninety per cent of prisoners who
respect probation and parole more than justify the laws under which they
are released. Probation to boys and young men should be extended.
Paroles to first-time convicts should be more liberal. Paroles to
second-timers might well be closely scrutinized, and for third-timers—if
the Prison Board “throws the key away” on them they will die off and
settle their own problem. I am in the third or fourth-timer class
myself, and if I got back into prison and the board sentenced me to life
with the privilege of applying for parole after fifteen years, I
wouldn’t have to look very far for the person responsible for it.

As I see it, the criminals of this generation should cause no concern.
They will soon be out of the way.  The problem wouldn’t be solved by
shooting them all at sunrise, or by releasing them all at sunrise.
Something might be done for the generation that is coming up. It seems
to me there’s the place to start—but what to do, I don’t know.

I am sure of but one thing—I failed as a thief, and at that I am luckier
than most of them. I quit with my health and liberty. What price
larceny, burglary, and robbery? Half my thirty years in the underworld
was spent in prison. Say I handled $50,000 in the fifteen years I was
outside; that’s about nine dollars a day. How much of that went to
lawyers, fixers, bondsmen, and other places? Then count in the years in
prison—suffering, hardship, privation. This was years ago when there was
much less police protection.

“What chance have you now?” I would ask any young man, “with shotgun
squads, strong-arm squads, and crime crushers cruising the highways and
byways; with the deadly fingerprinting, central identification bureau,
and telephotȯing of pictures; and soon every police station broadcasting
ahead of you your description and record? Then consider the accidents
and snitches—what chance have you? Figure it out yourself. I can’t.”

Had I spent that thirty years at any useful occupation and worked as
hard at it and thought and planned and brought such ingenuity and
concentration to bear on it, I would be independent to-day. I would have
a home, a family perhaps, and a respected position in my community. I
have none of those, but I have a job, I have two suits of clothes, I
have two furnished rooms in a flat. I have as many friends as I can be
loyal to. I am fifty years old, and so healthy that when I hear my
friends holding forth about their ailments I feel ashamed of myself. I
would not turn time backward and be young again, neither do I wish to
reach the century mark and possible senility.

I have no money, no wife, no auto. I have no dog.  I have neither a
radio set nor a rubber plant—I have no troubles.

I borrow money from my friends in a pinch, ride in their machines,
listen to their radios, make friends with their dogs, admire their
flowers, and praise their wives’ cooking.

If I could wish for anything else it would be a little more moderation,
a little more tolerance, and a little more of the trustful innocence of
that boy who learned his prayers at the knee of the gentle, kindly old
priest in the Sisters’ Convent School.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

Italicized text is surrounded by asterisks.

The following typographical errors in the Macmillan edition from 1926
have been corrected:

  - An extra comma appeared after "Well, whatever" in Chapter 3 on
  page 21.

  - A period was missing after the word "toes" at the end of a
  sentence in Chapter 9 on page 108.

  - "Zion's co-operative Mercantile Institution" in Chapter 13 on page
  170 is a proper noun and the name of a business, so the "c" has
  been capitalized as well.

  - A period was missing at the end of the sentence that begins with
  "The lashing is regulated by law" in Chapter 19 on page 277.

  - "Ottawa" was misspelled as "Ottowa" in Chapter 20 on page 312.
  Ottawa is later spelled correctly in Chapter 22. The variant with
  two O's only appeared in this single instance.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOU CAN'T WIN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
